International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 227 (2024) 125564
Available online 23 April 2024
0017-9310/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
An entropic understanding of flow maldistribution in thermally isolated 
parallel channels 
Toochukwu Aka , Shankar Narayan * 
Department of Mechanical, Aerospace, and Nuclear Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th Street, Troy, NY 12180, USA 
ARTICLE INFO 
Keywords: 
Parallel channels 
Flow distribution 
Entropy analysis 
Maldistribution 
Flow boiling 
ABSTRACT 
Flow across heated parallel channel systems exists in many applications. The performance of such systems 
experiencing multiphase flow could suffer from the deleterious effects of flow non-uniformity or maldistribution. 
Modeling the behavior of such systems is challenging due to the inherent non-linearity associated with the 
multiphase flow and the difficulty in determining the actual flow among several possible flow distributions. This 
study addresses the challenge by analyzing the entropy production in such systems. Using experiments on two 
thermally isolated, nominally identical, and externally heated parallel channels, we quantify irreversibility in the 
resulting multiphase flow by evaluating the entropy generation rate. Our experiments reveal that certain flow 
conditions result in severe maldistribution (flow ratio > 10) in the channels, associated with a sharp rise in 
entropy production. Such an increase is not predicted for uniform flow distribution across parallel channels, 
making maldistributed flow a thermodynamically favored state over equally distributed flow. We extend this 
understanding to non-identical parallel channels as well. With entropy analysis providing additional insight 
besides the fundamental equations governing mass, momentum, and energy conservation, this approach is 
valuable in predicting and controlling flow distribution in parallel channel systems. 
1. Introduction 
Parallel channels can scale performance in several engineering sys￾tems and devices, such as heat exchangers, chemical reactors, electronic 
cooling and power generation systems, fluidized beds, microfluidic de￾vices, and fuel cells [1–6]. Under certain operating conditions, such 
systems face the risk of instability, wherein flow distribution between 
parallel channels becomes severely non-uniform. This phenomenon 
could occur even for parallel channels that are nominally identical. It is 
undesirable since it can reduce the system’s performance and sometimes 
cause irreversible damage [1,2]. Therefore, prior efforts have focused on 
the prediction and characterization of flow maldistribution in parallel 
channels, especially where multiple phases (liquid and vapor) coexist [2, 
3,7–11]. Taitel et al. [10] showed that symmetrical heating of a 
multi-channel system can be unstable and established a control pro￾cedure against flow maldistribution. Minzer et al. [12] used linear sta￾bility analysis to differentiate between stable and unstable flow 
solutions. Results from Minzer’s study show that flow distribution may 
depend on history. Yang et al. [13] developed a 3D computational model 
of a nine parallel-channel system and showed that under the same 
conditions, the flow tends to be more equally distributed in parallel 
channels with a circular cross-section when compared to a triangular 
cross-section. With the aid of a model, Zhang et al. [7] showed that flow 
distribution in a parallel channel can be controlled by manipulating the 
total flow rate if the parallel channels are distinct. Natan et al. [14] 
showed up to five obtained for a single flow rate through a two 
parallel-channel system and speculated that the most feasible solution is 
the one with the least pressure drop. 
In these studies, the methodology employed in predicting the sta￾bility of different flow distributions involves the perturbation of the 
Navier Stokes’ equations [7,10,12], which establishes a criterion to 
ascertain if maldistribution can occur or not. While this approach dis￾tinguishes between stable and unstable flows [9,12] it is unclear why a 
particular flow distribution is bound to occur over other mechanically 
feasible possibilities. We address this gap in knowledge by introducing 
thermodynamic considerations to flow distribution in parallel channels. 
Entropy analysis, based on the second law of thermodynamics, is a 
valuable tool for analyzing the directionality of processes in physical 
systems. Entropy analysis evaluates and optimizes thermal-hydraulic 
systems by quantifying the degree of irreversibility associated with 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: narays5@rpi.edu (S. Narayan). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhmt 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2024.125564 
Received 23 October 2023; Received in revised form 21 January 2024; Accepted 11 April 2024 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 227 (2024) 125564
2
flow and energy transfer in systems. A recent study applied multiscale 
entropy analysis in identifying flow regimes and dynamic characteristics 
of gas-liquid two-phase flows in horizontal channels [15]. Several 
studies have also focused on optimizing heat exchangers via entropy 
generation minimization [16–19]. Applying entropy analysis to a known 
phenomenon, Zupanovic et al. [20] showed that Kirchoff’s loop law can 
be derived from the maximum entropy principle. Concerning stationary 
two-phase flow distribution, Giannetti et al. [21] developed a varia￾tional formulation of two-phase flow distribution at a fluid junction. 
They showed that the predicted flow distribution can correspond to 
different entropy production rates depending on the chosen two-phase 
flow model. For example, their study showed that the homogeneous 
model leads to a higher entropy production rate than the separated flow 
model. The study showed that the extremisation of the entropy gener￾ation rate provides the additional conditions necessary for closing the 
problem formulation to model flow distribution in fluid networks. This 
study uses entropy analysis to show the relationship between entropy 
generation and flow distribution in a system consisting of two thermally 
isolated parallel channels. In this case, externally heated channels cause 
vaporization and multiphase (liquid-vapor) flow. This study provides, 
for the first time, a thermodynamic perspective on flow distribution in 
parallel channels in such conditions. We demonstrate how the entropy 
analysis can be applied to distinguish between stable and unstable flow 
states corresponding to the same system operating conditions. 
2. Flow Distribution in Parallel Channels 
The changes in flow properties like pressure and temperature across 
parallel channels are useful in quantifying the flow performance. For 
given inlet conditions, such as inlet pressure Pi and temperature Ti, the 
exit properties like pressure Pe and enthalpy he can be calculated using 
the equations for conservation of mass, momentum balance, and the first 
law of thermodynamics. These fundamental equations take the 
following form for two thermally isolated parallel channels sharing a 
common inlet and exit (Fig. 1) and operating at steady-state. 
∫
CS
ρv⋅dA = 0 (1) 
∫
CS
vρv⋅dA =
∫
CS
− p dA +
∫
CS
τ dA +
∫
CS
g dV (2) 
Here v, p, τ, and g denote velocity, pressure, tangential stress, and 
body force per unit volume, respectively. In addition, the first law of 
thermodynamics gives 
∫
CS
hρv⋅dA =
∫
CS
dQ˙ (3) 
Application of these fundamental equations to flow in individual 
channels allows predicting the pressure change, ΔP = Pi − Pe for 
different flow rates, m˙ . The model outcome could suggest multiple 
possible flow distributions for a simple case involving two nominally 
identical channels (Fig. 1), where the flow is heated as it passes through 
them. For example, one possible model prediction can be equally 
distributed flow for all possible channel flow rates, irrespective of the 
exit quality (Fig. 2, distribution 1). Another possibility is that the flow is 
liquid and equally distributed at high flow rates, whereas it becomes 
unequally distributed or maldistributed with flow boiling at low flow 
rates (Fig. 2, distribution 2). A fundamental aspect that is still unclear is 
which of the two distributions is likely to occur and why. 
Previous studies have used a criterion based on the perturbation of 
the momentum balance equation to distinguish between stable (feasible) 
and unstable (infeasible) flow distributions. For example, based on this 
criterion, the stable distribution for the above system has been predicted 
as a maldistributed flow rather than a uniformly distributed one for flow 
rates below 7 × 10-4 kg/s. While this prediction may be accurate, the 
criterion provides no reason why a maldistributed state is more stable 
than equally distributed flow when both distributions satisfy the basic 
equations governing mass, momentum, and energy conservation. 
Moreover, the number of viable flow distributions increases with the 
number of parallel channels, making the traditional modeling approach 
more challenging – hence, a clearer understanding of the maldistribu￾tion phenomenon is necessary. 
The challenge introduced by non-unique solutions can be addressed 
by considering the entropic aspects of flow, which is often overlooked. 
Internal flow with energy transfer is associated with entropy generation 
as flows occur from the inlet i to the exit e of a channel. For steady flow 
through boundary-heated channels, the total entropy generation rate, 
S˙
gen can be calculated using the entropy balance equation for an open 
system. 
∫
CS
sρv⋅dA =
∫
CS
dQ˙
Tw
+ S˙
gen (4) 
Here Q ˙ denotes net heat transferred from the boundary into each 
channel maintained at a uniform temperature of Tw. The increase in 
entropy is also caused by the irreversibility associated with flow in the 
channels, S˙
gen. Irreversibility occurs in this pressure-driven flow due to 
many reasons, including heat transfer across a finite temperature dif￾ference, friction between the fluid and the channel wall, sudden changes 
in configuration and direction of flow, and the mixing of thermally 
dissimilar fluids from parallel channels at the flow junctions or headers 
[22]. The second law of thermodynamics requires that the rate of en￾tropy generation, S˙
gen ≥ 0, wherein equality holds only if the process is 
internally reversible. We believe that the flow distribution in a 
multi-channel network is governed by the maximization of S˙
gen. This 
study investigates entropy production in model-predicted flow distri￾butions in parallel channels. With the help of experiments involving 
thermally isolated parallel channels, we show how the entropy analysis 
determines the thermodynamically preferred flow distribution, which 
matches our observations. 
Fig. 1. Two thermally isolated parallel channels sharing a common inlet 
and exit. 
Fig. 2. Possible flow distribution predictions in two parallel channels (fluid: 
water, diameter: 1.4 mm, length: 0.3 m). 
T. Aka and S. Narayan 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 227 (2024) 125564
3
3. Experimental Procedure 
The test section (Fig. 3) comprises two parallel channels with a 
shared inlet and exit. Each channel consists of a valve to control flow, a 
flowmeter (Omega FLR-1008ST, ±3.3 × 10− 5kg /s), and channels made 
of stainless steel capillary tubes of internal diameter 1.4 mm, outer 
diameter 3.18 mm and length 305 mm, circumferentially interfaced 
with heaters (125 W) and fiberglass insulation. Also, pressure sensors 
(Omega PX309-030A5V, ±0.52 kPa and thermocouples (Omega T-type, 
±1 ◦C) were positioned at the inlet and exit of the test section to monitor 
flow. Four additional temperature sensors were attached to each chan￾nel wall at equidistant positions to keep track of the channel wall tem￾perature. Other components in the testbed include a temperature￾controlled heated tank as a liquid reservoir, a chiller to extract heat 
from the working fluid, an electronic valve, and a gear pump (Micro￾pump, GA-X21.CFS.E, 0 – 65 Hz) to maintain stable two-phase flow in 
the channels. The parallel channels are independently heated using 
programmable DC power supply modules (BK Precision, XLN 15010, 
±0.01%). The testbed uses water, and the system was maintained within 
a pressure range of 8 to 33 kPa. In addition to the flowmeters keeping 
track of the flow rate in each channel of the test section, a flow meter is 
positioned after the pump to monitor the total flow rate. Including this 
flow meter also allows for estimating the flow rate in the channel with 
minimal flow during severe flow maldistribution. 
In order to improve baseline stability, ensure consistency, and 
maintain the required pressure at the start of an experiment, the setup is 
initially de-aerated, and the fluid tank is heated before turning on the 
pump. This step ensures that the working fluid instantaneously gets to 
the pump at startup, preventing cavitation and potential damage to the 
pump. Experiments typically involve liquid flow in sequence from the 
pump to the test section, storage tank, and chiller. Within the test sec￾tion, fluid may split between two parallel channels, or flow might be 
limited to a single channel if the valve on the other branch is fully shut. 
Experiments typically involve liquid entering the test section below 
saturation conditions and exiting as liquid, liquid vapor mixture, or 
super-heated vapor. 
Initial experiments involve thermal characterization of each channel 
to determine the relationship between readily available physical quan￾tities (mass flow rate m˙ , channel surface area As and temperature dif￾ference between the channel wall and ambient Tw − T∞) and heat loss 
Q˙
loss to the surroundings, as shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, for a given 
electrical heat load Q˙
h = IV, the net heat transfer to the fluid Q ˙ = Q˙
h −
Q˙
loss, where Q˙
loss = Q˙
loss(m˙ , As, Tw − T∞) can be estimated from Fig. 4. 
This step is useful, especially when Q ˙ cannot be directly obtained using 
mass, temperature, and pressure measurements of the liquid-vapor 
mixture flow. An interface designed with LABVIEW and MATLAB is 
used for automated actuator control besides recording, compiling and 
plotting the experimental data from the testbed. 
The uncertainty in a parameter f is determined by applying the 
propagation of error [23–25], as shown in Eq. (5), 
Δf =
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ( ∂f
∂x1
Δx1
)2
+
( ∂f
∂x2
Δx2
)2
+ ... +
( ∂f
∂xn
Δxn
)2
√
(5) 
where Δx1…Δxn are the errors associated with the measurement of n 
independent variables, x1…xn to calculate the parameter f. 
4. Entropy generation and sources of irreversibility 
The following equations describe the first and second laws of ther￾modynamics for the N-channel system, which allow for determining S˙
gen. 
m˙(hi − he) = ∑N
j=1
Q˙
h,j − Q˙
loss,j (6) 
S˙
gen = m˙(se(Pe, he) − si(Pi, Ti)) − ∑N
j=1
Q˙
h,j − Q˙
loss,j
Tw,j
(7) 
The specific entropies at the inlet (si) and outlet (se) of the channel 
assembly are functions of inlet pressure Pi and temperature Ti, and exit 
pressure Pe and specific enthalpy, he, respectively. Here Q ˙ is obtained 
from the difference between the electrical heat load Q˙
h,j and heat loss 
Q˙
loss,j in each channel j. In a system of parallel channels, the total rate of 
entropy generated consists of the rate of entropy generated within each 
channel member S˙
gen,j, the rate of entropy generated from the splitting of 
flow at the common inlet S˙
gen,split and the rate of entropy generated at the 
common exit from irreversible heat transfer within mixing fluid streams 
Fig. 3. (a) Experimental pumped liquid cooling cycle. (b) Illustration of flow in a single channel. 
Fig. 4. Heat loss characterization of a single channel. 
T. Aka and S. Narayan 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 227 (2024) 125564
4
S˙
gen,mix. Compared with other contributions, S˙
gen,split is negligible because 
of the insignificant change in the thermodynamic properties of the fluid 
during the splitting process. As a result, S˙
gen is expressed as 
S˙
gen = S˙
gen,mix +∑N
j=1
S˙
gen,j (8) 
Since the channel assembly is thermally insulated and the mixing 
process is relatively fast, adiabatic conditions are assumed in deter￾mining S˙
gen,mix. 
S˙
gen,mix = ms˙ mix(Pmix, hmix) − ∑N
j=1
m˙ jse,j (9) 
Here, the specific entropy of the fluid mixture at the exit (smix) is a 
function of the mixture pressure Pmix and enthalpy hmix. In parallel 
channel experiments, Pmix and hmix are typically Pe and he, respectively. 
However, in cases where single-channel experiments are used to esti￾mate the properties of flow in parallel channels, Pmix and hmix are eval￾uated in terms of the mass flow fractions as 
hmix = ∑N
j=1
m˙
∗
j he,j, (10) 
Pmix = ∑N
j=1
m˙
∗
j Pe,j. (11) 
4.1. Sources of Irreversibility in a Single Channel 
Besides other sources, the hydraulic and thermal resistance affecting 
the flow and heat transfer in the two channels contribute significantly to 
irreversibility. The pressure drop ΔP = Pi − Pe across the channel de￾pends on the flow rate and the hydraulic resistance to flow, which de￾pends on fluid friction. Hence, ΔP indicates how certain flow aspects (e. 
g., friction) introduce irreversibility in the system. Similarly, heat 
transfer from the wall at Tw to the fluid at Tf is an irreversible process 
requiring a temperature differential (Tw − Tf). However, for an 
internally-reversible heat transfer process (S˙
gen = 0), the hypothetical 
temperature (Trev) of the control volume boundary, which in this case is 
the channel wall, can be calculated using the following equation. 
Trev = Q˙
h − Q˙
loss
m˙(s(Pi, he) − s(Pi, Ti)) (12) 
In practice, the channel wall temperature (Tw) is much larger than 
Trev due to irreversibilities. Hence, ΔTw = Tw − Trev is used as an indirect 
measure of deviation from an ideal heat transfer process. Fig. 5a shows 
ΔP, ΔTw, the exit vapor quality xe, and the entropy generation rate S˙
gen 
for a single channel heated at Q˙
h = 70 W. 
Starting from a large flow rate, a continuous decrease in m ˙ results in 
liquid-to-vapor phase change. Consequently, the fluid phase at the exit 
changes from liquid (xe= 0) to a liquid-vapor mixture (xe> 0). With 
boiling and an increase in vapor production, heat transfer characteristics 
within the channel change to become more efficient, which can be seen 
in the lowering of ΔTw with an increasing xe. Correspondingly, the rate 
of entropy generation also decreases. This decrease in S˙
gen occurs despite 
increasing ΔP, which indicates the more significant role of heat transfer 
irreversibility over flow non-idealities. At large flow rates, when ΔTw 
does not change much with an increase in m˙ , S˙
gen increases mainly due 
to rising ΔP – a regime where flow non-idealities dominate. 
To further investigate the contribution of flow and heat transfer ir￾reversibilities to the total entropy production, we also varied channel 
heating rates (Q˙
h) while keeping the flow rate (m˙) constant. Fig. 5b 
shows the variation of ΔP, ΔTw, the exit vapor quality (xe), and the 
entropy generation rate S˙
gen for a single channel with Q˙
h at a constant m ˙
= 3.48 × 10− 4 kg/s. Starting from a small heat load, a continuous in￾crease in Q˙
h results in the phase change from liquid (xe= 0) to liquid￾vapor mixture (xe> 0), a jump in ΔP and an increase in both ΔTw and 
S˙
gen. The sudden increase in ΔP is due to vapor production (phase 
change) in the channel at the threshold value of the heating rate around 
80 W. The increase in ΔTw and S˙
gen with no significant change in ΔP 
before and after phase change indicates that the irreversibilities asso￾ciated with heat transfer contribute more to S˙
gen than the flow 
irreversibilities. 
4.2. Irreversibility in two thermally isolated Parallel Channels 
Unlike flow in a single channel, entropy generation rates in two 
parallel channels are also influenced by the nature of the flow distri￾bution. Flow distribution is quantified in terms of m˙ ∗ which denotes the 
flow fraction in a channel relative to the total flow rate. Flow distribu￾tion is obtained based on measured flow rates, m˙ ∗
1 = m˙ 1/(m˙ 1 +m˙ 2) and 
m˙ ∗
2 = m˙ 2/(m˙ 1 + m˙ 2). For instance m˙ ∗ = 0.5 denotes equally distributed 
flow in a two-channel system. Fig. 6 shows the observed flow fraction 
m˙ ∗
, total entropy generation S˙
gen, pressure drop ΔP, and the temperature 
difference ΔTw for different total flow rates m ˙ in two nominally-identical 
thermally-isolated parallel channels under a constant heat load of 70 W 
each. 
At high flow rates in the two parallel identical channels, the pressure 
difference (ΔP) decreases as the total flow rate (m˙) decreases. For a large 
m˙ , the fluid emerges as a liquid at the exit. Since the characteristics of 
heat transfer do not change much under these conditions, there is no 
significant change in the temperature difference, ΔTw. Hence, like flow 
in a single channel, the S˙
gen in each channel, and the ΔP across the 
channel decreases as m ˙ decreases and ΔTw is expectedly uniform. 
As m ˙ decreases further, the fluid at the exit transitions from liquid to 
a liquid-vapor mixture due to heat-induced boiling. Phase-change 
characteristics now initiate severe flow maldistribution, as indicated 
by the departure in m˙ ∗ for the channels. This uneven distribution occurs 
with a sudden decrease in m˙ ∗ for channel 1 and an increase in m˙ ∗ for 
channel 2. A sudden rise in ΔP across the channels is also observed. The 
decrease in m ˙ also results in a sharp rise in ΔTw and S˙
gen in channel 1. In 
Fig. 5. Variation of single-channel pressure drop ΔP, the wall temperature 
difference ΔTw, exit quality xe, and entropy generation S˙
gen, as a function of (a) 
flow rate m ˙ at Q˙
h= 70 W. (b) external heat load Q˙
h at m˙ = 3.48 × 10− 4 kg/s.
T. Aka and S. Narayan 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 227 (2024) 125564
5
comparison, the change in S˙
gen is not that significant and ΔTw is mostly 
invariant in channel 2. 
The relative effects of flow and heat transfer irreversibilities on S˙
gen 
depend on the system. In this case, when the flow was equally distrib￾uted or when it remained maldistributed, the variation in S˙
gen is due to 
hydraulic irreversibilities. However, in this case, the transition from 
uniform to non-uniform flow distribution was mainly due to thermal 
irreversibilities. Considering both channels collectively, there is an in￾crease in the total S˙
gen. Hence, an important conclusion from this 
observation is that severe flow maldistribution is associated with a sharp 
rise in entropy production. The following section describes why severe 
maldistributed flows prevail over uniform and moderately non-uniform 
flows. 
5. Entropy Generation and Flow Distribution in Thermally 
Isolated Parallel Channels 
Although the flow rate in a single channel can be predicted based on 
the pressure drop and the channel geometry [1], the possible flow dis￾tributions in parallel channels are multiple and not easily predictable. 
This section shows why severely maldistributed flow prevails over uni￾form and moderately non-uniform distribution by considering the two 
parallel channels. Here, we compare the entropy generation in an actual 
flow distribution with the entropy generation if the flow were to have an 
unstable flow distribution. The “coupled” experiments involving 
simultaneous flow in both channels determine the flow distribution in 
the parallel channel assembly (Fig. 7a). However, estimating the char￾acteristics of unstable flow distributions for the same conditions used for 
the “coupled” experiments is not as straightforward since they do not 
occur naturally. Therefore, each channel is tested individually by dis￾connecting the other channel from the system, which is achieved by 
shutting off the corresponding upstream valve, as illustrated in Fig. 7b. 
Hence, such experiments are called “uncoupled.” The unstable flow 
characteristics of the parallel channel system, such as flow distribution, 
are determined using the characteristics observed in the uncoupled ex￾periments. For instance, if flow rates m˙ 1 and m˙ 2 were observed in 
channels 1 and 2 for a pressure drop ΔP in the uncoupled experiments, 
we estimate the flow distribution in an equivalent parallel channel 
system (with pressure drop ΔP) as m˙ ∗
1 = m˙ 1
m˙ 1+m˙ 2 and m˙ ∗
2 = m˙ 2
m˙ 1+m˙ 2
. 
5.1. Flow in Parallel Channels under Uniform Operating Conditions 
Fig. 8 compares the entropy generation rates for severely maldis￾tributed and uniformly distributed flows. In order to calculate the en￾tropy production rates for maldistributed flow, the two channels are 
equally heated (Q˙
h,1 = Q˙
h,2 = 70 W), and the total flow rate, m ˙ is 
gradually reduced (Fig. 8a). Alternatively, the total flow rate can be held 
fixed (m˙ = 6.96 × 10− 4 kg/s), and the heating rates, although uniform 
(Q˙
h,1 = Q˙
h,2 = Q˙
h/2), can be gradually increased (Fig. 8b). Then Eq. (7) 
is used to determine S˙
gen using the measured inlet and exit flow prop￾erties and wall temperatures. The entropy generation rate and flow 
distributions from these experiments are indicated as “coupled” chan￾nels in Fig. 8. 
Uniformly distributed flow at all flow rates or heat loads may be 
expected because of the uniformity of physical conditions across both 
channels. To estimate the entropy generation rate for uniformly 
distributed flow in parallel channels, we individually test each channel 
in the testbed by isolating the other channel from the system using the 
valves shown in Fig. 7b. Due to similar geometry and heating conditions, 
the total rate of entropy generation is obtained from Eq. 8 based on a 
common experimental input variable such as flow rate (m˙ 1 = m˙ 2 =
m˙ /2) (Fig. 8a) or heat load (Q˙
h,1 = Q˙
h,2) (Fig. 8b), yielding S˙
gen corre￾sponding to the hypothetical case of uniformly distributed flow (m∗ =
0.5) in the parallel channel assembly. These results are shown as 
“uncoupled” channels in Fig. 8. 
Fig. 8 compares S˙
gen for maldistributed and uniformly distributed 
flow in the parallel channels. Fig. 8a shows flow distribution and 
Fig. 6. Variation of parallel channel pressure drop ΔP, wall temperature dif￾ference ΔTw, entropy generation S˙
gen, and flow fraction m˙ ∗ as a function of the 
flow rate m ˙ at Q˙
h= 70 W 
Fig. 7. Illustration of (a) coupled and (b) uncoupled channels 1 and 2. 
Fig. 8. Variation of m˙ ∗ and S˙
gen with m ˙ for severely maldistributed and uni￾formly distributed flow for (a) varying m ˙ with Q˙
h1 = Q˙
h2 = 70 W, and (b) 
varying Q˙
h at m˙ = 6.96 × 10− 4 kg/s. 
T. Aka and S. Narayan 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 227 (2024) 125564
6
entropy generation when the flow rate m ˙ is gradually decreased, while a 
steady heating power of 70 W is applied to both channels. Likewise, 
Fig. 8b shows the flow distribution and entropy production when the 
heating load, although the same for both channels, is gradually 
increased with a total flow rate fixed at m˙ = 6.96 × 10− 4 kg/s. In case of 
single channel experiments, the flow rate in each channel is halved with 
m˙ = 3.48 × 10− 4 kg/s. 
When m ˙ is large or Q˙
h is low, the flow is equally distributed between 
the channels. For these conditions, S˙
gen decreases with m ˙ (Fig. 8a) and 
increases with Q˙
h (Fig. 8b). However, as m ˙ decreases or Q˙
h increases, the 
flow eventually becomes severely maldistributed. Evidently, this mal￾distribution corresponds to a sudden jump in S˙
gen. However, if the 
channels experience uniform flow, then S˙
gen does not show any dramatic 
variation. For these conditions representing a hypothetical uniform flow 
case, S˙
gen continues to decrease with m ˙ and increase with Q˙
h. Fig. 8 
shows that the entropy generation rate of severely maldistributed flow is 
much greater than equally distributed flow under similar conditions. 
Hence, flow maldistribution seen here is thermodynamically more 
favorable over equally distributed flow. It is due to this reason that non￾uniform flows are sustained unless conditions are significantly altered to 
enable uniform flow distribution. 
5.2. Flow in Parallel Channels under Non-uniform Conditions 
Severe maldistribution also occurs in parallel channels under non￾uniform or dissimilar conditions, which can be explained using en￾tropy analysis. To understand the effects of channel dissimilarity, we use 
different heat loads and valve openings associated with each channel to 
compare the entropy production rates. Fig. 9 shows the flow behavior 
with Q˙
h,1 = 80 W and Q˙
h,2 = 70 W, with the channel 1 valve fully open 
and the channel 2 valve half-opened. Since the channel conditions are 
inherently different, flow distribution is never uniform. Still, model 
predictions could indicate multiple possibilities. For example, in this 
case, the predictions can indicate either marginal or significant mal￾distributions in these channels. 
When flow occurs in both channels simultaneously, the distribution 
(m˙ ∗
) is directly measured, and Eq. (7) is used to obtain S˙
gen using the 
measured flow properties as described earlier. These results shown in 
Fig. 9 (right) are indicated as coupled channels. In order to estimate 
other possible distributions, we use flow characteristics in individual 
(uncoupled) channels, with heating and valve settings similar to the 
coupled channels experiment. The flow characteristics, given by ΔP 
versus m ˙ for the uncoupled and coupled channels, are shown in Fig. 9 
(left). For a total flow rate m ˙ observed in the experiments, the flow 
distributions in uncoupled channels 1 (m˙ 1) and 2 (m˙ 2) are obtained such 
that m˙ 1 + m˙ 2 = m˙ , with flow rates m˙ 1 and m˙ 2 corresponding to the same 
pressure drop ΔP for the specific m ˙ in the coupled experiments. To do 
this we find the intersection of a constant ΔP line with the ΔP versus m ˙
characteristic curves for each channel, resulting in flow distribution 
m˙ ∗
1 and m˙ ∗
2 whose sum is unity. Mathematically, this can be expressed as 
a minimization problem with m˙ ∗
1as the argument. 
m˙
∗
1 = arg min
m˙
∗
1∈[0,1]
⃒
⃒ΔP1
(
m˙
∗
1
)
− ΔP2
(
1 − m˙
∗
1
)⃒
⃒ (13) 
This procedure allows calculating m˙ ∗
1, m˙ ∗
2 = 1 − m˙ ∗
1 and the entropy 
generation, S˙
gen using S˙
gen,1 and S˙
gen,2 from single-channel experiments 
and S˙
gen,mix to account for the adiabatic mixing of the two fluid streams in 
Eq. (8). In conclusion, the resulting flow distribution for uncoupled 
channels indicates a moderate maldistribution and the corresponding 
S˙
gen is less than the coupled experiment. 
Due to dissimilar valve openings and heating of the two channels, 
flow characteristics are expected to differ. For large values of m˙ , both 
uncoupled and coupled channel results indicate that the flow is slightly 
maldistributed mainly due to differences in channel valve opening and 
S˙
gen decreases with m˙ . But as the total flow rate m ˙ decreases further, both 
coupled and uncoupled channel results indicate larger flow maldistri￾bution. Typical static modeling approaches could indicate that moderate 
maldistribution distribution is viable even for low total flow rates. 
However, an entropy analysis shows that the S˙
gen corresponding to 
severely maldistributed flow is greater than the S˙
gen corresponding to the 
moderately maldistributed flow. Consequently, the significantly mal￾distributed state is thermodynamically favored over moderately non￾uniform flow, as seen in the experiments. 
6. Conclusion 
This study analyzes entropy production and its relationship with 
flow distribution in thermally isolated parallel channels with multiphase 
flow. Parallel channels with multiphase flow, even if nominally iden￾tical, can experience maldistribution or unequal flow distribution, 
which is undesirable in many applications. Since such systems are 
inherently nonlinear due to multiphase flow characteristics, modeling 
and predicting this phenomenon is challenging and often results in 
multiple viable solutions. This study shows how an entropy analysis of 
flow in channels can overcome this modeling challenge. We hypothesize 
that flow maldistribution is governed by a thermodynamically favored 
state with maximum possible entropy production among the several 
flow possibilities identified by solving the fundamental equations gov￾erning mass, momentum, and energy conservation. 
Using experiments, we identify two primary sources of irreversibil￾ities associated with heat transfer and flow. Although both sources are 
present under all conditions, experiments show that flow irreversibil￾ities, such as flow friction, affect entropy generation at higher flow rates. 
In contrast, thermal irreversibilities, such as non-isothermal heat 
Fig. 9. Variation of m˙ ∗ and S˙
gen with m ˙ for severely maldistributed and moderately maldistributed flow. 
T. Aka and S. Narayan 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 227 (2024) 125564
7
transfer, tend to affect entropy generation more at lower flow rates and 
higher heat rates. 
The flow distribution in parallel nominally identical channels is 
uniform for high flow rates, corresponding to little to no phase change. 
However, a transition to maldistribution occurs when the flow rate is 
reduced, or the heating rate is increased. The transition from uniform to 
non-uniform flow distribution corresponds to a sharp rise in entropy 
production. Such an increase is not predicted for uniform flow distri￾bution across parallel channels, making maldistributed flow a thermo￾dynamically favored state over equally distributed flow. Maldistributed 
flow corresponds to the highest entropy production rate compared to 
other steady two-phase flow distributions for similar system constraints. 
Such flow behavior also exists in non-identical channels, wherein 
moderately non-uniform flow distributions could be predicted. How￾ever, in practice, the flow distribution is more significantly non-uniform 
since it is thermodynamically favored and corresponds to a higher en￾tropy production rate. 
Entropy analysis is often omitted from the modeling and perfor￾mance prediction of systems with multiphase flow and liquid-vapor 
phase change. This study shows how entropic considerations provide 
an additional perspective to understand and predict the behavior of 
nonlinear systems with several possible outcomes. This study analyzes 
stable and unstable flow distribution in two thermally isolated parallel 
channels and is therefore unsuitable for application to parallel channels 
with significant thermal coupling, such as a system of parallel channels 
constructed on a metallic substrate. Nevertheless, the principle of 
maximum entropy production may be extended to analyzing a larger 
system of parallel channels experiencing heating and multiphase flow or 
even thermally coupled channels. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Toochukwu Aka: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, 
Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. 
Shankar Narayan: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project 
administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgments 
The work was supported by the National Science Foundation’s Di￾vision of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Sys￾tems in the Directorate for Engineering under Grant No. 1944323. 
References 
[1] T. Aka, S. Narayan, Transient behavior and maldistribution of two-phase flow in 
parallel channels, IEEE Transact. Compon. Packag. Manufact. Techn. 12 (2) (2022) 
270–279. 
[2] E. Manavela Chiapero, M. Fernandino, C.A. Dorao, Numerical analysis of pressure 
drop oscillations in parallel channels, Internat. J. Multiphase Flow 56 (2013) 
15–24. 
[3] T. Van Oevelen, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, Predicting two-phase flow distribution 
and stability in systems with many parallel heated channels, Int. J. Heat. Mass 
Transf. 107 (2017) 557–571. 
[4] C. Guermonprez, S. Michelin, C.N. Baroud, Flow distribution in parallel 
microfluidic networks and its effect on concentration gradient, Biomicrofluidics. 9 
(5) (Sep. 2015). 
[5] B.H. Lim, E.H. Majlan, W.R.W. Daud, M.I. Rosli, T. Husaini, Numerical analysis of 
flow distribution behavior in a proton exchange membrane fuel cell, Heliyon. 4 
(2018) 845. 
[6] J.C. Pacio, C.A. Dorao, A study of the effect of flow maldistribution on heat transfer 
performance in evaporators, Nuclear Eng. Design 240 (11) (Nov. 2010) 
3868–3877. 
[7] T. Zhang, J.T. Wen, A. Julius, Y. Peles, M.K. Jensen, Stability analysis and 
maldistribution control of two-phase flow in parallel evaporating channels, Int. J. 
Heat. Mass Transf. 54 (25–26) (2011) 5298–5305. 
[8] G. Patankar, T.R. Salamon, Maldistribution of two-phase flow in parallel channel 
heat sinks: effects of thermal connection between channels, in: Proceedings of the 
17th InterSociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in 
Electronic Systems, ITherm 2018, 2018, pp. 653–663. 
[9] U. Minzer, D. Barnea, Y. Taitel, Evaporation in parallel pipes - Splitting 
characteristics, Internat. J. Multiph. Flow 30 (7-8) (2004) 763–777. SPEC. ISS. 
[10] Y. Taitel, U. Minzer, D. Barnea, A control procedure for the elimination of mal flow 
rate distribution in evaporating flow in parallel pipes, Solar Energy 82 (4) (2008) 
329–335. 
[11] V. Manoj Siva, A. Pattamatta, S.K. Das, Effect of flow maldistribution on the 
thermal performance of parallel microchannel cooling systems, Int. J. Heat. Mass 
Transf. 73 (2014) 424–428. 
[12] U. Minzer, D. Barnea, Y. Taitel, Flow rate distribution in evaporating parallel pipes￾modeling and experimental, Chem. Eng. Sci. 61 (22) (2006) 7249–7259. 
[13] P. Yang, K. Tian, Z. Tang, N. Li, M. Zeng, Q. Wang, Flow distribution and heat 
transfer performance of two-phase flow in parallel channels with different cross 
section, Chem. Eng. Trans. 94 (2022) 703–708. 
[14] S. Natan, D. Barnea, Y. Taitel, Direct steam generation in parallel pipes, Internat. J. 
Multiphase Flow 29 (11) (2003) 1669–1683. 
[15] B. Sun, H. Chang, Y.L. Zhou, Flow regime recognition and dynamic characteristics 
analysis of air-water flow in horizontal channel under nonlinear oscillation based 
on multiscale entropy, Entropy 21 (7) (Jul. 2019). 
[16] J.C. Ordo´nez, ˜ A. Bejan, Entropy generation minimization in parallel-plates 
counterflow heat exchangers, Int. J. Energy Res. 24 (10) (Aug. 2000) 843–864. 
[17] O. S. Ezeora and O. Ezeora, “Purdue e-pubs entropy generation analysis and 
optimum tube length of two-phase flow evaporator tube entropy generation 
analysis and optimum tube length of two-phase flow evaporator tube.” [Online]. 
Available: http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/iracc/961. 
[18] M.N. Hossain, K. Ghosh, Entropy generation minimization for boiling flow inside 
evaporator tube with R32 and R410A refrigerants: a comparison of different two￾phase flow models, J. Therm. Sci. Eng. Appl. (Feb. 2023) 1–38. 
[19] L.S. Maganti, P. Dhar, Consequences of flow configuration and nanofluid transport 
on entropy generation in parallel microchannel cooling systems, Int. J. Heat. Mass 
Transf. 109 (2017) 555–563. 
[20] P. Zupanovi ˇ ´c, D. Jureti´c, S. Botri´c, Kirchhoff’s loop law and the maximum entropy 
production principle, Phys. Rev. e Stat. Phys. Plasmas. Fluids. Relat. Interdiscip. 
Topics. 70 (5) (2004) 5. 
[21] N. Giannetti, M.A.B. Redo, K. Saito, H. Yoshimura, Variational formulation of 
stationary two-phase flow distribution, Case Stud. Thermal Eng. 26 (Aug. 2021). 
[22] A. Sahoo, R. Nandkeolyar, Entropy generation and dissipative heat transfer 
analysis of mixed convective hydromagnetic flow of a Casson nanofluid with 
thermal radiation and Hall current, Sci. Rep. 11 (1) (Dec. 2021). 
[23] D. B. Pengra, “Notes on data analysis and experimental uncertainty.” Accessed: 
Oct. 10, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://courses.washington.edu/phys431/un 
certainty_notes.pdf. 
[24] T. Aka, Uncertainty_Prop, MATLAB Central File Exchange, Aug. 12 (2023). 
[25] I. Novikova, “Analysis of experimental data,” 2008. Accessed: Oct. 10, 2023. 
[Online]. Available: https://courses.washington.edu/phys431/uncertainty_notes. 
pdf. 
T. Aka and S. Narayan 