Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
Available online 20 October 2022
0038-092X/© 2022 International Solar Energy Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Solar Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/solener
Multi-dimensional numerical analysis of flow instabilities in 3D-shaped
honeycomb absorbers
Robin Tim Broeske a,∗
, Peter Schwarzbözl b
, Bernhard Hoffschmidt b
a DLR, Institute of Solar Research, Prof.-Rehm-Straße 1, 52428 Jülich, Germany
b DLR, Institute of Solar Research, Linder Höhe, 51147 Köln, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Open volumetric receiver
Flow stability
CFD simulation
Discrete 3D model
1D LTNE model
A B S T R A C T
Considered a valid alternative to other receiver types, open volumetric receivers for central tower power plants
have been developed and researched for multiple decades. 3D-Shaped absorber geometries, made possible by
modern manufacturing technologies, particularly offer the promise of high thermal efficiencies. Yet, volumetric
absorbers carry the inherent risk of flow instabilities, which can lead to a total failure of the receiver due to
local overheating. Therefore, a numerical, multi-dimensional methodology for the flow stability analysis of
volumetric absorbers is proposed. The first stage of the methodology applies an 1D LTNE continuum model
to quantify the general pressure loss characteristic of an absorber and identifies critical pressure drop levels
with potential for flow instability. These levels are tested as part of the second analysis stage using a discrete
3D CFD model against different irradiation and flow perturbations. If the absorber is able to compensate the
disturbances, its flow behavior is deemed stable. Otherwise, the absorber geometry is considered susceptible
to local overheating due to flow instability.
The new methodology has been validated against two reference absorbers with known stable resp. unstable
flow behavior. Further, the new approach was applied to analyze the flow stability of two 3D-shaped
honeycomb absorber geometries. It was shown that the geometric features of 3D-shaped absorbers can directly
improve the flow stability, but do not prevent instabilities automatically. Therefore, a flow stability analysis
should be included in design/optimization processes of new volumetric absorbers alongside a maximization of
the thermal efficiency.
1. Introduction
Open volumetric receivers (OVR) have been developed for more
than 25 years in parallel to the prevailing molten salt technology as
a realistic alternative for central receiver power plants on an indus￾trial scale. Most work in the past and recently has been dedicated to
finding suitable porous structures as volumetric absorbers. However,
volumetric absorbers carry the risk of flow instabilities, where self￾reinforcing local overheating can lead to total failure of the structure.
Receiver failures caused by local overheating have been observed dur￾ing experimental tests of different volumetric absorbers in the past (e.g.
Hoffschmidt, 1997; Buck, 2000; Hoffschmidt et al., 2001). Kribus et al.
(1996) were the first to show, using a theoretical one-dimensional
model, the fundamental tendency towards flow instabilities for those
volumetric absorbers that exhibit a linear dependence of the pressure
loss on the flow velocity. Hoffschmidt (1997) and Pitz-Paal et al.
(1997) developed a quasi-three-dimensional, which allowed to model
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: robin.broeske@dlr.de (R.T. Broeske).
1 Within the context of this publication, honeycomb absorber refers to absorber structures characterized by parallel channels (opposed to e.g. porous foams).
the effects of radial heat transfer and non-homogeneous irradiation
and included linear and quadratic pressure loss modeling based on
the Darcy–Forchheimer equation. After the investigation of different
types of volumetric absorbers, they concluded that absorbers with a
dominantly quadratic pressure loss exhibit stable flow behavior and
radial heat transfer reduces the probability of flow instabilities. Buck
(2000) focussed on flow instability in solar–chemical receiver–reactors.
They derived that solar–chemical reactors are generally more sus￾ceptible for flow instabilities than volumetric receivers, but different
design measures aimed at modifying the pressure drop characteristic
of the reactor can increase the flow stability. Becker et al. (2006)
utilized a theoretical and a numerical model to study flow stability in
different porous materials, and identified materials with a high thermal
conductivity and a predominantly quadratic pressures loss behavior
as the preferable materials for solar applications. Singh and Chandra
(2018) analyzed the pressure loss characteristic of an OVR based on
circular cylinders which showed no tendency for flow instabilities.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2022.10.007
Received 2 June 2022; Received in revised form 27 July 2022; Accepted 4 October 2022

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
87
R.T. Broeske et al.
Nomenclature
Acronyms
CFD Computational fluid dynamics
HiTRec High Temperature Receiver
LTNE Local thermal non-equilibrium
OVR Open volumetric receiver
SiSiC Siliconized silicon carbide
Greek Symbols
𝛼 Absorptivity (−)
𝛥𝑝 Pressure loss (Pa)
𝜀 Emissivity (−)
𝜅 Heat conductivity ( W
m K )
𝜇 Dynamic viscosity (Pa s)
𝜌 Density ( kg
m3
)
𝝈 (Linear) stress tensor ( N
m2
)
𝜎𝑠𝑏 Stefan–Boltzmann constant ( W
m2 K4
)
𝛹 Viewfactor (−)
Roman Symbols
𝐺 Irradiance ( W
m2
)
ℎ Specific enthalpy ( J
kg )
𝑰 Unit tensor (−)
𝐼 Incident irradiance ( W
m2
)
𝐽 Surface radiosity ( W
m2
)
𝐾 Kinetic energy ( J
kg )
𝐿 Absorber length (m)
𝑁 Number of absorber unit cells (−)
𝑝 Pressure (Pa)
𝑝
∗ Normalized pressure loss (−)
̇𝑞 Heat flux ( W
m2
)
𝑇 Temperature (K)
𝑇
∗ Normalized outlet temperature (−)
𝒖 Velocity vector ( m
s
)
𝑊 Width (m)
Subscripts
abs Absorber
air Air
ap Aperture
cond Conduction
f Fluid
in Inlet
k Radiation index
lvl Level
max Maximum
out Outlet
r Radiative
s Solid
sec Section
sol Solar
surf Surface
tot Total
Aiming at improving the thermal efficiency of open volumetric
receivers, recent research focuses on 3D-shaped volumetric absorbers,
but these absorbers have yet to be investigated with regards to flow
stability. However, a flow stability analysis should be part of the
design process of new 3D-shaped absorbers, because improved thermal
efficiencies generally lead to more unstable flow behavior as shown
by Hoffschmidt (1997). 3D-Shaped absorbers are volumetric structures
where the geometry purposefully varies along the main flow direction.
As a result, important absorber characteristics (e.g. the porosity) also
change throughout the absorber, potentially improving the thermal
efficiency. Investigated 3D-shaped absorbers include layered ceramic
foams (Roldán et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015; Zaversky et al., 2018),
metal wire meshes (Ávila-Marín et al., 2018), stacked metal sheet
absorbers (Pabst et al., 2017; Broeske et al., 2022), and honeycomb
absorbers1
(Gomez-Garcia et al., 2015; Alberti et al., 2016; Cagnoli
et al., 2016; Capuano et al., 2017; Broeske et al., 2022). The listed
studies represent only an excerpt of the research in the field of open
volumetric receivers, more information on the development of the
OVR technology can be found in the reviews by Ávila-Marín (2011)
and Lipiński et al. (2021).
A new two-stage methodology is introduced within this publication
specifically designed for the investigation of 3D-shaped volumetric
absorbers’ flow stability. For the first time, a discrete three-dimensional
CFD model is used to analyze flow instability as part of the new
methodology, which includes lateral radiative and conductive heat
transfer between absorber unit elements. By applying the methodology
to 3D-shaped honeycomb absorbers, it is demonstrated how volumetric
absorbers can be directly designed to improve their flow stability.
2. Methodology
The new approach to investigate flow instability in volumetric
absorbers is divided into two stages. First, a fast, one-dimensional con￾tinuum model is used to analyze the general pressure loss characteristic
of an absorber structure. From the pressure drop characteristic, pressure
drop levels with potential for flow instability are identified, which are
further examined in the second analysis stage. By employing a three￾dimensional CFD model, the flow behavior of an absorber geometry is
tested against irradiation and flow perturbations in order to determine
if the volumetric absorber operates stably at the selected levels.
2.1. First stage - 1D continuum model
Volume-averaged methods, also called continuum models, are com￾mon approaches for the simulation of volumetric absorber geometries.
Opposed to unit cell models (cf. Section 2.2), the absorber geometry
is not directly modeled by the continuum approach. Rather, the heat
transfer and flow mechanisms are governed by equations relying on
effective properties. These properties (e.g. convective heat transfer
coefficients) are determined experimentally or calculated from auxil￾iary numerical simulations. The review by Ávila-Marín et al. (2019)
gives a thorough summary of the different continuum models used
for the simulation of volumetric absorbers. With an one-dimensional,
local thermal non-equilibrium (LTNE) continuum model previously
developed by the authors (Broeske et al., 2022), the general pressure
loss characteristic of the investigated absorbers is evaluated. Detailed
information about the 1D model, e.g. on the governing equations, the
boundary conditions and the radiation modeling, can be found in the
previous publication by the authors (Broeske et al., 2022).
Based on the studies by Pitz-Paal et al. (1997) and Becker et al.
(2006), flow instabilities can occur if a single pressure drop level is
associated with multiple air outlet temperature values. Such a pressure
drop level would enable the absorber structure to reach different tem￾perature levels locally compared to the overall operating point of the
OVR. If one of the associated temperature values is above the maximum
allowable temperature of the absorber material, structural failure of the
absorber due to local overheating becomes possible.
The pressure drop characteristic of each investigated absorber is
derived by running simulations with the continuum model for a wide

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
88
R.T. Broeske et al.
range of different massflow density values. For the evaluation, a nor￾malized air outlet temperature 𝑇
∗ and a normalized pressure loss 𝑝
∗ are
introduced as defined by Pitz-Paal et al. (1997):
𝑇
∗ =
𝑇𝑓,𝑜𝑢𝑡 − 𝑇𝑖𝑛
𝑇𝑖𝑛
(1)
𝑝
∗ =
𝑝
2
𝑖𝑛 − 𝑝
2
𝑜𝑢𝑡
𝑝𝑖𝑛
𝜇𝑖𝑛
𝜌𝑖𝑛𝐿𝐼𝑎𝑝
× 108
(2)
The normalization is based on the incident solar irradiation 𝐼𝑎𝑝, the
absorber depth 𝐿, and the inlet pressure 𝑝𝑖𝑛 and temperature 𝑇𝑖𝑛. The
normalized pressure loss is expected to fall monotonically with an in￾creasing normalized outlet temperature for stable volumetric absorbers.
Accordingly, the characteristics of absorbers with potential for flow
instability would show regions with non-monotonic behavior. Within
these regions, pressure drop levels associated with multiple outlet
temperatures can be identified. These pressure drop levels are then
selected for the second stage of the analysis.
2.2. Second stage - 3D CFD model
The continuum model used for the first analysis stage is based on
the central assumption of a laterally uniform flux and temperature
distribution allowing the reduction to one dimension. However, flow
instabilities in volumetric absorbers are specifically associated with
non-uniform flux and flow conditions (cf. Pitz-Paal et al., 1997; Becker
et al., 2006). A three-dimensional CFD model is therefore adopted as
the second stage of the instability analysis. Similar to volume-averaged
approaches, 3D CFD models are often used for the calculation of the
thermal efficiency of absorber geometries (cf. Ávila-Marín et al., 2019).
In order to limit the needed computation time, uniform behavior is
generally assumed again for the efficiency calculation and the absorber
geometries are reduced to so called ‘‘unit cells’’, the smallest represen￾tative elements (e.g. a single channel for honeycomb absorbers). This
assumption is dropped for the flow stability analysis and a horizontal
row of 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡 unit cells is simulated instead of a single absorber unit cell.
The details of the 3D CFD model are shown in Appendix.
For each pressure drop level selected during the first stage, a series
of simulations with the stationary 3D model are conducted. Through
the introduction of disturbances, the flow behavior of the absorber
geometry is tested w.r.t. its stability similar to the numeric model
by Becker et al. (2006). First, a reference case with an uniform incident
solar irradiation and an uniform pressure drop for all absorber channels
is calculated. Constant, uniform temperature distributions are used
as the initial values. For the introduction of the perturbations, the
row of absorber unit cells is divided into three horizontal sections
(similar to Pitz-Paal et al., 1997), each containing 𝑁𝑠𝑒𝑐 unit cells.
Both, irradiation and flow perturbations are tested mimicking non￾homogeneous conditions caused by e.g. cloud-passages or a temporary
blockage of absorber channels. Starting again from uniform tempera￾ture distributions, a solution with an active irradiation disturbance is
created by increasing the incident solar irradiation for the left section,
reducing the irradiation for the right section, while using the base
flux level for the middle section. This solution is then applied as the
starting value for another simulation, where the incident irradiation
is reverted to the homogeneous distribution of the base case for all
sections. Similarly, a solution with an active flow disturbance is created
starting from uniform temperature distributions. Instead of setting a
uniform pressure drop for the absorber channels, massflow density
levels are enforced for each section. For the middle and right section,
the massflow density is set to the value of the base case solution. The
left section is assigned a significantly lower massflow density simulat￾ing a (partial) blockage. The resulting solution is used as the starting
value for another simulation, where the flow disturbance is reverted by
prescribing the uniform pressure drop of the base case again. For the
final two simulations, simultaneous irradiation and flow perturbations
are considered. An overview of the simulation cases is given in Table 1,
Table 1
Overview of the different 3D simulation cases.
Case Start values Disturbed Disturbed
irradiation flow
Base constant values No No
Ir-A constant values Yes No
Ir-D Ir-A No No
Fl-A constant values No Yes
Fl-D Fl-A No No
Ir+Fl-A constant values Yes Yes
Ir+Fl-D Ir+Fl-A No No
a suffix ‘‘A’’ indicates a simulation with active perturbation and a suffix
‘‘D’’ a simulation with deactivated perturbation.
Based on the results by Becker et al. (2006), the irradiation and flow
disturbances should not have any effect on the calculated solutions for
stable absorber geometries. The simulations with deactivated perturba￾tions are therefore expected to converge to the solution of the base case
for stable absorbers. The results for volumetric absorbers with potential
for flow instabilities are anticipated to vary between the base case and
the perturbed cases.
3. Results
3.1. Reference absorbers
In order to validate the new methodology, two monolithic hon￾eycomb absorbers have been selected for the first simulation series.
The HiTRec absorber is manufactured out of siliconized silicon carbide
(SiSiC) and consists of simple, square channels with a channel width
of 2.0 mm and a wall strength of 0.8 mm (Hoffschmidt, 1997). The
HiTRec absorber has been continuously proven to be a robust volu￾metric absorber without any known flow stability issues throughout
experiments (e.g. Hoffschmidt et al., 2003) and the operation of the
Solar Tower Jülich demonstration power plant (Koll et al., 2009).
The second design, the CorRec absorber, has exhibited stability issues
during experimental testing, which even lead to local melting of the
absorber structure (Hoffschmidt et al., 2001; Fend et al., 2004). Similar
to the HiTRec design, the CorRec absorber is also composed of square
channels, but has a channel width of 1.12 mm and a wall strength of
0.13 mm and is made out of the ceramic material Cordierit (Hoffschmidt,
1997). The finer channels and thus higher porosity of CorRec design
indicate a more linear pressure drop behavior compared to the less
porous HiTRec absorber, which in combination with the significantly
lower heat conductivity of Cordierit compared to SiSiC can explain
the tendency towards flow instability (cf. Pitz-Paal et al., 1997; Becker
et al., 2006). The aim of the first simulation series is to show that the
new methodology can correctly depict the stable resp. unstable flow
behavior of the two honeycomb absorbers.
Aperture2
(normal) irradiance levels of 𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 0.5
MW
m2
, 1.0
MW
m2
and
1.5
MW
m2
are considered, where the average angle of the incident ra￾diation is parallel to the main axis of the absorber channels and the
maximum opening angle is 15°. The ambient pressure 𝑝𝑖𝑛 and temper￾ature 𝑇𝑖𝑛 are set to 101 325 Pa and 100 °C. As the first stage of the flow
stability analysis, simulations with varying massflow densities were
carried out using the 1D continuum model for each flux level and both
geometries. The resulting normalized pressure loss 𝑝
∗
(Eq. (2)) values
are plotted over the normalized outlet temperatures 𝑇
∗
(Eq. (1)) in
Fig. 1.
As seen in the zoomed, right view in Fig. 1, the CorRec absorber
exhibits areas with a non-monotonous pressure loss behavior for all
2 Within the context of this publication, the aperture is defined as the plane
containing the absorber front.

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
89
R.T. Broeske et al.
Fig. 1. Stage 1 results — normalized pressure loss over normalized outlet temperature for the HiTRec and CorRec absorbers (left plot: full pressure loss range; right plot: zoomed
view of the critical zones for the CorRec absorber).
Table 2
Pressure loss levels selected for the second stage of the flow stability analysis.
Level Absorber 𝐼𝑎𝑝 [
MW
m2
] 𝑝
∗
𝑙𝑣𝑙 [−] 𝛥𝑝𝑙𝑣𝑙 [Pa]
1
CorRec
0.5 19.0 82.0
2 1.0 19.4 168.0
3 1.5 21.3 257.5
4 1.0 19.8 184.0
5 HiTRec 1.5 8.75 113.5
three flux density levels. Within these regions, three different outlet
temperature levels correspond to the same pressure loss value, a clear
indicator for unstable flow behavior. For the two higher flux levels,
the highest temperatures of the unstable regions extend beyond the
maximum temperature of 1200 °C for Cordierit (Hoffschmidt, 1997),
which is indicated by the left dashed line in Fig. 1, demonstrating the
danger for overheating. Oppositely, the results for the HiTRec geometry
show a monotonously decreasing pressing loss with increasing outlet
temperatures. Therefore, the model predicts no instability problems for
the HiTRec absorber.
Five pressure drop levels (Table 2) have been selected for the
second stage of the flow stability analysis as indicated by the horizontal
dashed lines in Fig. 1. One pressure drop value was chosen for each of
the instability regions for the CorRec absorber. Additionally, a fourth
pressure drop level was selected for 𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.0
MW
m2
, which is expected to
correspond to stable operating point for the CorRec absorber similar to
the pressure value picked for the HiTRec design.
For each pressure drop level, seven 3D simulations as defined in
Table 1 have been carried out. The irradiation and flow perturbations
were implemented as described in Section 2.2 and a horizontal row of
twenty four absorber channels was considered for both geometries (cf.
Section 3.2). The 3D simulation results are presented in Fig. 2. Each row
corresponds to one simulation, showing normalized outlet temperatures
based on massflow-weighted averages for the left, mid, and right third,
and for all 24 channels.
All five base cases show homogeneous outlet temperatures as is
expected for the uniform irradiation and press drop boundary condi￾tions. For cases with active disturbances (‘‘Ir-A’’, ‘‘Fl-A’’, ‘‘Ir+Fl-A’’),
the normalized temperatures vary for the three sections, showing the
effect of the applied perturbations. The behavior of the cases with the
deactivated disturbances (‘‘Ir-D’’, ‘‘Fl-D’’, ‘‘Ir+Fl-D’’) however differs
between the HiTRec and CorRec absorber. For the HiTRec design, the
three cases with deactivated disturbances yield a homogeneous outlet
temperature distribution again, which matches the results of the base
case. This corresponds to the behavior expected for stable volumetric
absorbers. The CorRec design only shows a stable behavior for the
pressure drop of 𝛥𝑝 = 184.0 Pa and 𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.0
MW
m2
. The results for the
Fig. 2. Stage 2 results — normalized outlet temperatures for the 3D simulation cases
for the HiTRec and CorRec absorbers.
pressure drop levels selected based on the non-monotonous regions in
Fig. 1 instead show clear unstable flow behavior. Despite deactivated
perturbations, i.e. despite uniform irradiation and uniform pressure
boundary conditions, the outlet temperatures still vary significantly
between the three sections.
The different flow behavior between the HiTRec and CorRec ab￾sorbers is further illustrated by Figs. 3 and 4. Each figure shows the
solid surface temperature distributions for the base case, the case with
an active combined perturbation (‘‘Ir+Fl-A’’) and the continued case
with the deactivated perturbation (‘‘Ir+Fl-D’’). The HiTRec absorber
successfully compensates the temperature increase in the left-most
section caused by the applied disturbance, but a notable increase
remains for the CorRec design. Concluding, the presented methodology

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
90
R.T. Broeske et al.
Fig. 3. Stage 2 results — 3D view of the solid surface temperature distributions for
selected simulation cases for the HiTRec absorber (𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2 & 𝛥𝑝 = 113.5 Pa).
Fig. 4. Stage 2 results — 3D view of the solid surface temperature distributions for
selected simulation cases for the CorRec absorber (𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2 & 𝛥𝑝 = 257.5 Pa).
correctly evaluates the flow behavior as stable for the HiTRec absorber
and unstable for the CorRec absorber.
3.2. Result independence
With the aim of demonstrating the robustness of the presented flow
stability analysis, the key numeric parameters of the second analysis
stage, the number of simulated absorber unit cells and the introduced
irradiation and flow disturbances, are investigated as part of the next
sets of simulations.
Number of simulated absorber unit cells
Through numerical simulations, Hoffschmidt (1997) showed that
the tendency towards flow instability of a volumetric absorber module
is related to the ratio of its length/depth 𝐿 to its width 𝑊 . The
cross-sections relevant for lateral heat transfer are directly proportional
to the absorber depth, while the distance over which disturbance
have to be compensated is proportional to the absorber width. As a
consequence, Hoffschmidt concluded that an absorber’s flow stability
generally increases3 with an increasing ratio 𝐿
𝑊
. All absorbers inves￾tigated within this publication have a fixed length of 𝐿 = 40 mm.
However, the simulated absorber width directly depends on the number
of simulated absorber unit cells. To test this dependency, the 3D
simulations for the HiTRec and CorRec absorber for a flux level of
1.5 MW from the previous section were repeated for varying numbers
of absorber unit cells. The resulting normalized outlet temperatures are
shown in Fig. 5.
For the HiTRec absorber geometry, the base case and the cases with
a combined irradiation and flow disturbance were carried out for one,
three, eight and seventeen absorber channels per each of the three
evaluation sections. The same disturbances, i.e. the same massflow
3 The pressure drop characteristic of an absorber is also affected by a
change of the absorber depth, which could potentially counteract the increased
flow stability.
Fig. 5. Stage 2 results — normalized outlet temperatures for different numbers of unit
cells for the HiTRec and CorRec absorbers (𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2
, 𝛥𝑝 = 113.5 Pa for HiTRec,
𝛥𝑝 = 257.5 Pa for CorRec).
reductions and irradiation changes, were applied for all simulations.
The maximum of 51 total channels corresponds to a physical width
142.8 mm slightly larger than the width of 140 mm of a standard HiTRec
absorber module, which is considered as the maximum relevant width.
As expected based on the observations by Hoffschmidt (1997), the
impact of the active disturbances (cases ‘‘Ir+Fl-A’’) increases with a
growing number of absorber unit cells. However, the HiTRec absorber
is able to negate the effect of the perturbations successfully after their
deactivation (cases ‘‘Ir+Fl-D’’) clearly indicating a stable flow behavior.
The simulations of the CorRec absorber were repeated for one, three
and eight channels per section with a maximum simulated physical
width of 30 mm.
Compared to HiTRec, a significantly greater influence of the dis￾turbances can be observed despite the smaller corresponding physical
width. In the case of 𝑁𝑠𝑒𝑐 = 1, the three simulated absorber channels
show homogeneous outlet temperatures, but the outlet temperature
level is changed even after the deactivation of the perturbation com￾pared to the base cases. This illustrates that the CorRec design is able to
homogenize perturbations over the small width of three channels, but
the perturbation can change the operating point of the whole absorber
due to its unstable flow behavior. For 𝑁𝑠𝑒𝑐 = 8, the CorRec absorber
cannot compensate the disturbance, the evaluations section maintain
their non-uniform outlet temperatures. Even larger configurations do
not need to be investigated as the effect of the flow instability only
increases with the simulated width.
The general approach of the flow stability analysis should include
the simulation of an increasing number of absorber channels until
either a clear indicator for flow instabilities is found (e.g. CorRec) or
stable behavior is observed even for the largest relevant physical width
(e.g. HiTRec).
Irradiation and flow disturbances
The irradiation and flow disturbances are meant to test the volumet￾ric absorbers against non-homogeneous conditions caused by e.g. cloud￾passages or a temporary blockage of absorber channels. The numerical

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
91
R.T. Broeske et al.
Table 3
Overview of the tested disturbance configurations.
Set Initial values Irradiation Disturbed
𝑇𝑓
[K] 𝑇𝑠
[K] disturbance section (flow)
1 800.00 1000.00 ±10% Left
2 373.15 473.15 ±3% Left + mid
3 373.15 1200.00 ±5% Left + right
implementation of the perturbations however offers a number of de￾grees of freedom, e.g. the strength of the irradiation change or the
scope of the massflow reduction. Three sets with different perturbations
were therefore tested to analyze the influence on the flow stability
analysis. The first set of simulations corresponds to the simulations
shown in Section 3.1 (𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2
). For the other two sets the form
of the irradiation disturbance (cases ‘‘Ir-A’’) was kept the same, i.e. an
increased flux level for the left section, an unchanged level for the mid
section, and a decrease for the right section. However, the strength of
the irradiation change was reduced from ±10 % for set 1 to ±3 % for set
2 and ±5 % for set 3. As described in Section 2.2, the flow disturbance
for the first simulation set consists of a significant reduction of the
massflow through the left-most section while keeping the base case
massflow level for the other two sections. For the second simulation
series, the massflow reduction is applied to the left and mid section
and only the right section is kept at the base level. The third flow
disturbance is created through a massflow reduction for the left section,
a massflow increase for the right section and the base level for the mid
section. The uniform initial temperature distributions used for the base
cases and the cases with active perturbations are also modified between
the three sets as shown in Table 3.
In Fig. 6, the normalized outlet temperatures are presented for the
different perturbation sets for both absorber geometries. The HiTRec
absorber consistently compensates all disturbances and always con￾verges towards the base operating point after the deactivation of the
disturbances. The temperature distributions for the CorRec absorber
differ for the three simulation sets, but all show the apparent unstable
flow behavior of the CorRec design. The goal of the presented flow
stability analysis is to determine if an absorber geometry exhibits
the tendency towards flow instability or not rather than simulating a
specific unstable scenario. All tested perturbation configurations are
equally suitable to test an absorber’s stability as seen in Fig. 6.
3.3. 3D-shaped absorbers
The presented methodology was developed with the aim of assess￾ing the flow stability of 3D-shaped volumetric absorbers. 3D-Shaped
absorbers are characterized by intentional changes in their geometry
along the flow direction. In particular, 3D-shaped honeycomb absorbers
often have openings in the channel walls, which allow lateral energy
exchange via radiation or interchanging air flow on top of the lateral
heat conduction within the solid absorber. To investigate the influence
of such geometric features on the flow stability, two 3D-shaped adapta￾tions of the CorRec absorber were created. A single absorber channel for
each is shown in Fig. 7. The first design, the CorStep absorber, is based
on the StepRec absorber investigated in a previous publication (Broeske
et al., 2022).
The StepRec absorber contains three steps of increasing width at
the absorber front, which allow for a deeper penetration of the inci￾dent solar radiation and improve the thermal efficiency. The CorStep
absorber is given a single step with a length of 5 mm and a width equal
to half the channel width. The idea of the short step is to keep the
pressure loss characteristic of the CorStep absorber close to the one
of the original CorRec geometry, while still enabling the investigation
of the effect of the open channel walls on the flow stability. The step
is only added in the horizontal direction, so that the 3D stage of the
analysis can again be limited to a horizontal row of absorber channels
Fig. 6. Stage 2 results — normalized outlet temperatures for different configurations
of irradiation/flow disturbances for the HiTRec and CorRec absorbers (𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2
,
𝛥𝑝 = 113.5 Pa for HiTRec, 𝛥𝑝 = 257.5 Pa for CorRec).
Fig. 7. Unit cell models for the CorStep and CorWin absorbers.
instead of a full square. The second adaption, CorWin, adds four
alternating windows to the downstream half of the absorber channel.
As seen in Fig. 4, the effect of the perturbations, which the CorRec
absorber cannot compensate for, is notably focused in the deeper half
of the absorber channels. The four windows are added in an alternating
pattern into the right and left side walls of the absorber channels. This
makes a direct radiative energy exchange between channels and their
second next neighbors possible and potentially reduces the effect of the
perturbations. The wall strength, channel width and heat conductivity
are kept unchanged from the original CorRec design (cf. Section 3.1).

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
92
R.T. Broeske et al.
Fig. 8. Stage 1 results — normalized pressure loss over normalized outlet temperatures
for the CorStep and CorWin absorbers.
Fig. 9. Stage 2 results — normalized outlet temperatures for the 3D simulation cases
for the CorStep and CorWin absorbers compared to the CorRec results.
The results of the continuum model simulations for the CorStep
and CorWin absorbers are given in Fig. 8. The same incident solar
radiation cases as in Section 3.1 were considered. Similar to the CorRec
results (cf. Fig. 1), both designs show zones of non-monotonous press
loss behavior signaling potential for flow instability. Therefore, one
pressure drop level per geometry and 𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2 were selected for the
3D stage of the flow stability analysis. As for lateral heat conduction,
the effect of energy exchange across channel openings on flow stability
can only be assessed via the second 3D stage, because the continuum
model assumes laterally uniform temperature distributions. For the
CorStep absorber, a new pressure drop level 𝑝
∗
𝑙𝑣𝑙,6
= 19.6 (𝛥𝑝𝑙𝑣𝑙,6 =
255.0 Pa) close to the level of the CorRec absorber (𝑝
∗
𝑙𝑣𝑙,3
) is used due to
the similar pressure loss characteristics. A seventh pressure loss level
𝑝
∗
𝑙𝑣𝑙,7
= 18.5 (𝛥𝑝𝑙𝑣𝑙,7 = 240.5 Pa) has been selected for the CorWin
geometry.
In Fig. 9, the normalized outlet temperatures for the different
channel sections are presented for the base cases and the cases of a
combined irradiation and flow perturbation. Perturbations similar to
the simulations of CorRec absorber were applied, the corresponding
outlet temperatures for the CorRec design are repeated in Fig. 9. The
solid surface temperature distributions for the CorStep absorber are
Fig. 10. Stage 2 results — 3D view of the solid absorber temperature distribution for
selected simulation cases for the CorStep absorber (𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2 & 𝛥𝑝 = 255.0 Pa).
Fig. 11. Stage 2 results — 3D view of the solid surface temperature distributions for
selected simulation cases for the CorWin absorber (𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2 & 𝛥𝑝 = 240.5 Pa).
given by Fig. 10 and for the CorWin absorber by Fig. 11. Overall, the
CorStep absorber shows the similarly unstable flow behavior compared
to the original CorRec design. However, the CorWin absorber achieves
homogeneous outlet temperatures even for the case with an active
disturbance (‘‘Ir+Fl-A’’), as only the upstream half without the windows
is affected. But, the unstable flow characteristic causes the operating
point of all 24 channels to change for the case with the deactivated
disturbance (‘‘Ir+Fl-D’’) despite the homogeneous outlet temperatures.
The results for the two 3D-shaped absorbers lead to the expectation
that further modification, e.g. a combination of the two designs, could
yield a stable volumetric absorbers even with the low heat conductivity
of Cordierit.
4. Discussion
The presented flow stability analysis methodology was shown to be
able to correctly identify the flow behavior of the HiTRec absorber as
stable and the CorRec absorber’s behavior as unstable. The numeric
simulation results therefore match the observations made during exper￾iments in the past by Hoffschmidt et al. (2001) and Fend et al. (2004).
This also has to serve as the validation of the new approach due to the
lack of further, appropriate experimental data.
As seen by the two pressure drop levels which were investigated
for the CorRec design at 𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.0
MW
m2
, the flow instabilities only occur
within certain, critical pressure loss regions (𝛥𝑝𝑙𝑣𝑙,2 = 168.0 Pa). Outside
of these zones (𝛥𝑝𝑙𝑣𝑙,4 = 184.0 Pa), the flow behavior of the CorRec
absorber appears as stable. Thus, the first step of the flow analysis
is necessary to identify these critical pressure loss levels. In turn, the
second stage using the 3D CFD model is required to correctly assess
the influence of lateral energy exchange on flow stability. The general
pressure loss characteristic for the CorRec (Fig. 1) and the CorStep
(Fig. 8) absorbers exhibit similar critical, non-monotonous regions. But,
the open channel walls of the CorStep design make it better suited
to compensate non-homogeneous temperature distribution associated

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
93
R.T. Broeske et al.
with flow instability (cf. Fig. 9), which can only be observed via the
3D CFD model.
In accordance with the results of Hoffschmidt (1997), the likelihood
of flow instability was seen to increase for an increasing width of the in￾vestigated absorber segment (cf. Fig. 5). The considered absorber width
is directly proportional to the number of simulated absorber unit cells
during the second analysis stage. Therefore, a robust analysis should
include simulations of an increasing number of absorber channels until
either a clear indicator for flow instabilities is found or stable behavior
is observed even for the largest relevant physical width.
The implementation of the irradiation and flow stability distur￾bances offer a number of degrees of freedom to chose the actual
disturbance against which the volumetric absorbers are tested against.
All configurations considered for this publication appeared equally
suited to evaluate the flow stability (cf. Fig. 6). However, it is difficult
to directly assess how likely a concrete perturbation is to occur in a
real open volumetric receiver. In the numerical analysis, the HiTRec
absorber, which is known to be stable based on experiments and
the operation of the Solar Tower Jülich, is able to compensate even
the stronger perturbations, e.g. an irradiation disturbance of ±10 % at
𝐼𝑎𝑝 = 1.5
MW
m2
across a few absorber channels. Therefore, it is deemed
advantageous to intentionally select strong disturbances in order to
prevent an underestimation of flow instabilities, while using the HiTRec
absorber as the benchmark for stable volumetric absorbers.
5. Conclusion and outlook
A new, numerical methodology for the flow stability analysis of
volumetric absorbers has been developed. The first stage of the method￾ology applies an 1D LTNE continuum model to quantify the general
pressure loss characteristic of an absorber and identifies critical pres￾sure drop levels with potential for flow instability. These levels are
tested as part of the second analysis stage using a discrete 3D CFD
model against different irradiation and flow perturbations. If the ab￾sorber is able to compensate the disturbances even for the critical
pressure drop levels, its flow behavior is deemed stable. Otherwise, the
absorber geometry is considered susceptible to flow instability.
The new methodology has been validated for two reference ab￾sorbers with known stable resp. unstable flow behavior. Further, the
new approach was applied to analyze the flow stability of two 3D￾shaped honeycomb absorber geometries. It was shown that the ge￾ometric features of such 3D-shaped absorbers can directly improve
the flow stability, but do not prevent instability. Therefore, a flow
stability analysis should be included in design/optimization processes
of new volumetric absorbers alongside a maximization of the thermal
efficiency. The new simulation approach was specifically created for
this purpose. However, this cannot not directly replace the experimen￾tal evaluation of the flow stability, more experimental data would be
particularly useful for 3D-shaped absorber designs. As the next steps,
the presented methodology is planned to be further tested for and to
be applied to more complex 3D-shaped volumetric absorber geometries.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela￾tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
The research institution at which this work has been conducted (DLR)
holds a number of patents in relation to the topic of this publication
(volumetric air receivers, ‘‘HiTRec’’ vol. air receiver technology) in￾cluding: DE10029940C1, DE19740644C2, DE112017002386A5. Some
of the patents have been licensed (non-exclusively) to the company
Kraftanlagen München GmbH.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry for Eco￾nomic Affairs and Energy on the basis of a decision by the German
Bundestag, reference number 0324300B.
Appendix. 3D CFD model details
While Section 2.2 focused on the specific modeling of the flow insta￾bilities, the different components of the 3D CFD model are explained in
this Appendix. The model is implemented within the open-source CFD
software OpenFOAM® (2022). The majority of the model was already
available in OpenFOAM, only the main boundary condition (Eq. (A.4))
had to be added. The raytracing software which is used for the simula￾tion of the incident solar irradiation is not part of OpenFOAM, but was
developed at the German Aerospace Center in the past.
Governing equations
The air flow is modeled based on the stationary, laminar and com￾pressible Navier–Stokes equations, which in general vector notation are
given by (based on Schröder, 2010):
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎩
𝛁 ⋅ (𝜌𝒖) = 0
𝛁 ⋅
(
𝜌𝒖𝒖𝑇
)
= −𝛁𝑝 + 𝛁 ⋅ 𝝈
𝛁 ⋅ (𝜌𝒖ℎ) + 𝛁 ⋅ (𝜌𝒖𝐾) = 𝛁 ⋅ (𝝈 ⋅ 𝒖) + 𝛁 ⋅
(
𝜅𝑓𝛁𝑇𝑓
)
(A.1)
Here, 𝒖 is the velocity vector, 𝐾 =
1
2
𝒖 ⋅ 𝒖 denotes the (specific) kinetic
energy and 𝝈 the linear stress tensor for Newtonian fluids:
𝝈 = −
2
3
𝜇𝛁 ⋅ 𝒖𝑰 + 𝜇
(
𝛁𝒖 + (𝛁𝒖)
𝑇
)
(A.2)
The Navier–Stokes equations are solved for the void volume of the
horizontal row of absorber unit cells plus an (empty) entry region in
front of the channels. The air density is modeled using the ideal gas law,
while temperature and pressure dependent functions are implemented
based on data from Stephan et al. (2013) for the other air properties.
For the solid absorber volume of the unit cell row, a general heat
conduction equation (e.g. Baehr and Stephan, 2006) is solved for the
solid temperature field 𝑇𝑠
:
0 = 𝛁 ⋅
(
𝜅𝑠𝛁𝑇𝑠
)
(A.3)
Temperature-dependent experimental data from the German Aerospace
Center is used for the heat conductivity of SiSiC, while the heat con￾ductivity of Cordierit is set based on data from Hoffschmidt (1997).
The differential equations are solved using the finite volume method
as implemented by OpenFOAM. Second-order, upwind-biased solution
schemes are used for the air flow simulation and second order central
differencing schemes for the solid heat conduction.
Boundary conditions
The different components of the 3D model are connected with each
other through an energy balance for the absorber surface areas:
0 = ̇𝑞𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑,𝑎𝑏𝑠 + ̇𝑞𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑,𝑎𝑖𝑟 + ̇𝑞𝑠𝑜𝑙 − ̇𝑞𝑟
(A.4)
The energy balance is used to calculate the distribution of the surface
temperature 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓 , which is then applied as a fixed value boundary
condition for both volumetric regions, i.e. for the simulation of the air
flow and the simulation of the heat conduction within the absorber.
The derivation of he absorbed solar flux ̇𝑞𝑠𝑜𝑙 and the net radiative
flux ̇𝑞𝑟 are explained in the next section. The heat conduction between
solid absorber and absorber surface ( ̇𝑞𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑,𝑎𝑏𝑠) and between air flow
and absorber surface ( ̇𝑞𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑,𝑎𝑖𝑟) are evaluated based on the surface
normal temperature gradients. These gradients depend on the surface
temperature 𝑇𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓 and the volumetric temperature distributions of the
solid (𝑇𝑠
) resp. the air (𝑇𝑓
) temperature. As a result, Eq. (A.4) connects
all model components which are solved in an iterative fashion. Only
the absorbed solar flux is calculated beforehand and treated as constant
while solving the main model.
For the beginning of the entry region, a fixed value temperature
boundary condition sets the inlet temperature 𝑇𝑖𝑛 (cf. Eq. (1)), while
zero gradient temperature boundary conditions are prescribed for all

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
94
R.T. Broeske et al.
remaining boundaries of the air flow and the heat conduction simula￾tion, i.e. for the absorber outlet, the entry region sides and the outer
sides of the solid absorber volume.
The flow boundary conditions differ between the simulation cases
with active flow disturbances (cases ‘‘Fl-A’’ and ‘‘Ir+Fl-A’’, cf. Table 1)
and all other 3D simulation cases. For the cases without flow distur￾bances, pure pressure boundary conditions are used. At the start of the
entry region, the ambient/inlet pressure value of 𝑝𝑖𝑛 is applied, while
the pressure at the outlet of each of the 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡 absorber channels is set
to 𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡 = 𝑝𝑖𝑛 − 𝛥𝑝 depending on the selected pressure drop level. A zero
gradient boundary condition is used for the velocity at the absorber out￾let, while the inlet velocities are derived from the pressure gradient. For
the cases with active flow disturbances, the outlet pressure boundary
condition is changed to a zero gradient boundary condition. Outflow
velocities based on the massflow density for the three channel sections
are prescribed causing the flow disturbances. The deactivation of the
flow disturbances (cases ‘‘Fl-D’’ and ‘‘Ir+Fl-D’’) is equal to reverting the
flow boundary conditions back to the purely pressure-driven boundary
condition set. The pressure-driven boundary set in particular allows the
3D model to calculate the resulting massflow density distributions for
the 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡 absorber channels, which can range from uniform in case of
a stable absorber (cf. Fig. 3) to non-uniform in case of an unstable
absorber (cf. Fig. 4).
Radiation modeling
All absorber surfaces are treated as opaque, diffusive reflecting
surfaces with constant optical properties. For the SiSiC material of the
HiTRec absorber and for the Cordierit material of the CorRec, CorStep
and CorWin designs, a surface absorptivity and emissivity of 𝛼𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓 =
𝜀𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓 = 80 % is used based on Hoffschmidt (1997). The radiation mod￾eling is split into separate approaches for the incident solar irradiation
and the thermal radiation exchange between the absorber surfaces.
The raytracing software FEMRay is used to track the incident solar
irradiation. FEMRay was developed at the German Aerospace Center
as an extension of the raytracing software MIRVAL and allows surface
definitions via finite element meshes with MIRVAL (cf. Amsbeck et al.,
2008; Schwarzbözl et al., 2008). The starting positions of the solar rays
are spread out (based on a uniform random distribution) across the void
portions of the channel entry cross-sections, i.e. the void part of cross￾section containing the absorber front surface. The initial directions are
also generated randomly based on an average initial direction and an
opening angle. The opening angle defines a cone around the average
direction from which the initial directions are sampled as deviations
from the average direction. The absorption and diffusive reflection
of solar rays throughout the porous absorber are then tracked until
the rays are either totally absorbed or reflected (back) out of the
absorber structure. The final result of the raytracing software is the 3D
distribution of the absorbed solar irradiation for each absorber surface
̇𝑞𝑠𝑜𝑙, which is used as part of the boundary Eq. (A.4).
The thermal emissions of the absorber surfaces and the subsequent
radiative heat exchange is modeled via a surface-to-surface radiation
model based on viewfactors. The radiation model, which is already
part of OpenFOAM, defines the net radiative flux of each surface ̇𝑞𝑟 as
the difference between irradiance 𝐺 and surface radiosity 𝐽. Based on
the numeric division of the absorber surfaces into discrete subsurfaces
or mesh elements, the surface radiosity of one element 𝑘 is the sum
of surface emission and reflected irradiance, while the irradiance is
calculated from the surface radiosities of all other elements and the
viewfactors 𝛹𝑘,𝑙 between the elements:
̇𝑞𝑟,𝑘 = 𝐺𝑘 − 𝐽𝑘
, (A.5)
𝐽𝑘 = 𝜀𝑘𝜎𝑠𝑏𝑇
4
𝑘
+
(
1 − 𝜀𝑘
)
𝐺𝑘
, (A.6)
𝐺𝑘 =
∑
𝑙
𝛹𝑘,𝑙𝐽𝑙
(A.7)
In addition to the absorber surfaces, the void portions of the channel
entry cross-sections and the void absorber outlet cross-sections are also
part of the viewfactor model as artificial surfaces. The artificial inlet
surfaces are treated as black surfaces (𝜀𝑘 = 1) with a temperature of
zero Kelvin (𝑇𝑘 = 0). All radiation which reaches the inlet surfaces is
absorbed and considered lost as part of the absorber (bulk) emission
loss. The artificial outlet surfaces are also treated as black surfaces
(𝜀𝑘 = 1), but they are given an artificial temperature 𝑇𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑘 which is
updated throughout the simulation:
𝑇𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑘 =
4
√
𝐺𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑘
𝜎𝑠𝑏
(A.8)
This artificial temperature results in a net radiative flux of zero for the
outlet surfaces implementing a perfectly (diffusive) reflective boundary
condition for the absorber outlet. (Setting an emissivity of 𝜀𝑘 = 0 is
not possible as the derivation of the solution via a linear system of
equations requires 𝜀𝑘 > 0.) The radiation elements corresponding to
the absorber surfaces are given the material emissivity (𝜀𝑘 = 𝜀𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓 ) and
their temperature is set based on the surface temperature distribution
calculated based on the boundary Eq. (A.4).
A system of linear equations can be derived from Eqs. (A.5)–(A.7)
which is solved for the net radiative flux. The net radiative flux is then
used as part of the absorber surface boundary condition linking the
radiation model with the other model components.
References
Alberti, F., Santiago, S., Roccabruna, M., Luque, S., Gonzalez-Aguilar, J., Crema, L.,
Romero, M., 2016. Numerical analysis of radiation propagation in innovative
volumetric receivers based on selective laser melting techniques. In: AIP Conference
Proceedings. 030001. http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4949053.
Amsbeck, L., Buck, R., Heller, P., Jedamski, J., Uhlig, R., 2008. Development of a tube
receiver for a solar-hybrid microturbine system. In: 14th Biennial CSP Solarpaces
Symposium 2008.
Ávila-Marín, A.L., 2011. Volumetric receivers in solar thermal power plants with
central receiver system technology: A review. Sol. Energy 85 (5), 891–910. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2011.02.002.
Ávila-Marín, A., Fernández-Reche, J., Martinez-Tarifa, A., 2019. Modelling strategies for
porous structures as solar receivers in central receiver systems: A review. Renew.
Sustain. Energy Rev. 111, 15–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.03.059.
Ávila-Marín, A.L., Alvarez de Lara, M., Fernández-Reche, J., 2018. Experimental results
of gradual porosity volumetric air receivers with wire meshes. Renew. Energy 122,
339–353. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.01.073.
Baehr, H., Stephan, K., 2006. Wärme- und Stoffübertragung. Springer Verlag.
Becker, M., Fend, T., Hoffschmidt, B., Pitz-Paal, R., Reutter, O., Stamatov, V.,
Steven, M., Trimis, D., 2006. Theoretical and numerical investigation of flow
stability in porous materials applied as volumetric solar receivers. Sol. Energy 80
(10), 1241–1248. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2005.11.006.
Broeske, R.T., Schwarzbözl, P., Hoffschmidt, B., 2022. A new partitioned 1D LTNE
continuum model for the simulation of 3D-shaped honeycomb absorbers. Sol.
Energy (ISSN: 0038-092X) 236, 533–547. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2022.
02.024.
Buck, R., 2000. Massenstrom-Instabilitäten bei volumetrischen Receiver-Reaktoren (Dis￾sertation).
Cagnoli, M., Savoldi, L., Zanino, R., Zaversky, F., 2016. Numerical evaluation of an
innovative cup layout for open volumetric solar air receivers. AIP Conf. Proc. 1734
(1), 030007. http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4949059.
Capuano, R., Fend, T., Stadler, H., Hoffschmidt, B., Pitz-Paal, R., 2017. Optimized volu￾metric solar receiver: Thermal performance prediction and experimental validation.
Renew. Energy 114, 556–566. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.07.071.
Chen, X., Xia, X.-L., Meng, X.-L., Dong, X.-H., 2015. Thermal performance analysis on a
volumetric solar receiver with double-layer ceramic foam. Energy Convers. Manage.
97, 282–289. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.03.066.
Fend, T., Hoffschmidt, B., Pitz-Paal, R., Reutter, O., Rietbrock, P., 2004. Porous
materials as open volumetric solar receivers: Experimental determination of ther￾mophysical and heat transfer properties. Energy 29 (5–6), 823–833. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/s0360-5442(03)00188-9.
Gomez-Garcia, F., Gonzalez-Aguilar, J., Tamayo-Pacheco, S., Olalde, G., Romero, M.,
2015. Numerical analysis of radiation propagation in a multi-layer volumetric
solar absorber composed of a stack of square grids. Sol. Energy 121, 94–102.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2015.04.047.
Hoffschmidt, B., 1997. Vergleichende Bewertung verschiedener Konzepte vol￾umetrischer Strahlungsempfaenger (Dissertation). DLR.
Hoffschmidt, B., Fernandez, F., Hennecke, K., Romero, M., Stobbe, P., Tellez, F., 2001.
Development of ceramic volumetric receiver technology. In: 5th Cologne Solar
Symposium, Cologne, 21.06.01.

Solar Energy 247 (2022) 86–95
95
R.T. Broeske et al.
Hoffschmidt, B., Téllez, F.M., Valverde, A., Fernández, J., Fernández, V., 2003.
Performance evaluation of the 200-kWth HiTRec-II open volumetric air receiver. J.
Solar Energy Eng. 125 (1), 87–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.1530627.
Koll, G., Schwarzbözl, P., Hennecke, K., Hartz, T., Schmitz, M., Hoffschmidt, B., 2009.
The solar tower Jülich - A research and demonstration plant for central receiver
systems. In: Proceedings of the 15th SolarPACES Conference.
Kribus, A., Ries, H., Spirkl, W., 1996. Inherent limitations of volumetric solar receivers.
Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 118 (3), 151. http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.2870891.
Lipiński, W., Abbasi-Shavazi, E., Chen, J., Coventry, J., Hangi, M., Iyer, S., Kumar, A.,
Li, L., Li, S., Pye, J., Torres, J.F., Wang, B., Wang, Y., Wheeler, V.M., 2021.
Progress in heat transfer research for high-temperature solar thermal applications.
Appl. Therm. Eng. 184, 116137. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.
116137.
Pabst, C., Feckler, G., Schmitz, S., Smirnova, O., Capuano, R., Hirth, P., Fend, T.,
2017. Experimental performance of an advanced metal volumetric air receiver for
solar towers. Renew. Energy 106, 91–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.
01.016.
Pitz-Paal, R., Hoffschmidt, B., Böhmer, M., Becker, M., 1997. Experimental and
numerical evaluation of performance and flow stability of different types of open
volumetric absorbers under non-homogeneous irradiation. Sol. Energy 60 (3–4),
135–150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0038-092X(97)00007-8.
Roldán, M.I., Smirnova, O., Fend, T., Casas, J.L., Zarza, E., 2014. Thermal analysis and
design of a volumetric solar absorber depending on the porosity. Renew. Energy
62, 116–128. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.06.043.
Schröder, W., 2010. Fluidmechanik. Wissenschaftsverlag Mainz in Aachen.
Schwarzbözl, P., Belhomme, B., Buck, R., Uhlig, R., Amsbeck, L., Schmitz, M., 2008.
Simulation solarer turmsysteme. In: 11. Kölner Sonnenkolloquium.
Singh, G., Chandra, L., 2018. On the flow stability in a circular cylinder based open
volumetric air receiver for solar convective furnace. Energy Procedia 144, 88–94.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2018.06.012.
Stephan, P., Kabelac, S., Kind, M., Martin, H., Mewes, D., Schaber, K. (Eds.),
2013. VDI-Wärmeatlas. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-19981-3.
The OpenFOAM Foundation, 2022. OpenFOAM | Free CFD Software | The OpenFOAM
Foundation. https://openfoam.org/, Accessed: 25.07.2022.
Zaversky, F., Aldaz, L., Sánchez, M., Ávila-Marín, A.L., Roldán, M.I., Fernández￾Reche, J., Füssel, A., Beckert, W., Adler, J., 2018. Numerical and experimental
evaluation and optimization of ceramic foam as solar absorber – Single-layer vs
multi-layer configurations. Appl. Energy 210, 351–375. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2017.11.003.