Compact Heat
Exchangers
Third Edition
W. M. Kays
Dean of Engineering, Stanford University
A. L. London
Professor of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University
MEDTECH
Engaging Sciences—Developing Minds!
A Division of Scientific International

MEDTECH
A Division of
Scientific International Pvt. Ltd.
Copyright © Scientific International
Special arranged with Krieger Publishing Company, Inc. USA
Third Edition: 2018
All rights reserved. No Part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means–electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval 
system–without permission in writing from the publisher.
Disclaimer: Every effort has been made to avoid any error or omission in this publication. It may be noted that 
neither the author nor the publisher will be responsible for any damage or loss of action to any one of any kind, in 
any manner, therefrom. 
ISBN: 978-93-87938-03-8
The authors, editors, contributors and the publisher have, as far as it is possible, taken care to ensure that the 
information given in this text is accurate and up-to-date. However, readers are strongly advised to confirm that the 
information complies with current standards of practice. 
Every effort has been made where necessary to contact holders of copyright to obtain permission to reproduce
copyright material. If any have been inadvertently overlooked, the publisher will be pleased to make the necessary 
arrangements at the first opportunity.
Published by: Vinod Kumar Jain, Scientific International (Pvt.) Ltd.
Registered Office: • New Delhi: 4850/24, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, 
New Delhi-110002
Branch Offices: • Bengaluru: House No. 1665, Ground Floor, 18th Main, 
BSK 2nd Stage, Bengaluru-560070 
 • Guwahati: House No. 31, 1st Floor, KKB Road, Chenikuthi, 
Opp. Sirdi Sai Bidya Mandir High School, PO-Silpukhuri, 
District-Kamrup, Guwahati-781003
 • Kerala: Ponary House, Paudua Raod,
Konthuruthy-682013, Thevara
PO Ernakulam district, Kerala, India -
 • Kolkata: 127/G, Manicktala Main Road, 
Kankurgachi, Near Yogodyan, Kolkata-700054
Printed in India
Compact Heat
Exchangers

C·w
C
C;
C;
C
Nomenclature
Most of the nomenclature is defined as it isintroduced or else is obvious from the
context of its use. However, it is summarized here for convenience.
Any consistent dimensioning system may be used. All the heat transfer and
flow-friction parameters are presented in nondimensional form so that a shift to
a preferred system of dimensions presents no complications.
Roman Letter Symbols
A Exchanger total heat transfer area on one side
Ac Exchanger minimum free-flow area, or pArrfor matrix surfaces
AI Exchanger total fin area on one side
Ar
, Exchanger total frontal area
Ak Cross-sectional area for longitudinal conduction
a Plate thickness
a Short side of a rectangular flow passage
b Plate spacing
b Long side of a rectangular flow passage
C Flow-stream capacity rate (Wcp
)
C, Flow-stream capacity rate of cold-side fluid
Ch Flow-stream capacity rate of hot-side fluid
CL Coupling-liquid capacity rate
Cmin Minimum of c, or c,
Cmax Maximum of c, or c,
C, Rotor capacity rate of a rotating periodic flow exchanger (rotor mass times
specific heat times r/h)
Rotor capacity-rate ratio (Cr!Cmin), dimensionless
(C;Or/Od,min), dimensionless
Fluid heat capacity within exchanger (COd)
COd for minimum-capacity-rate fluid
Wall total heat capacity (exchanger core mass times specific heat of core
material)
Cw/Cm in• dimensionless
Specific heat
Specific heat at constant pressure
Specific heat at constant volume
C;
C;
C
C· C·w
w

xii Nomenclature
E
k
L
1
M
m
m
Inside diameter of a circular tube
Hydraulic diameter of any internal passage (Dh = 4rh = 4AcL/A)
Outside diameter of a tube in a tube bundle, crossed-rod matrix, or a pin in
pin-fin surface
Friction power expended per unit of surface heat transfer area [see Eq.
(1-2)]
Correction factor to log-mean rate equation, dimensionless
Mean friction factor, defined on the basis of mean surface shear stress [Eq.
(1-6)]
Fuel-air ratio
Local friction factor, defined on the basis oflocal surface shear stress
Apparent mean friction factor [Eq. (6-6)]
Exchanger flow-stream mass velocity (W/Ac
)
Proportionality factor in Newton's second law
Hydrogen-carbon ratio for hydrocarbon fuels
Unit conductance for thermal-convection heat transfer
Contraction loss coefficient for flow at heat exchanger entrance [Eq. (5-1)],
dimensionless
Momentum flux correction factor, [Eq. (6-7)), dimensionless
Expansion loss coefficient for flow at heat exchanger exit [Eq. (5-2)1, dimen￾sionless
Unit thermal conductivity
Total heat-exchanger flow length; also flow length of uninterrupted fin
Fin length from root to center
Molecular weight
A fin effectiveness parameter hh/kt5, .J4h/kd
Exponent in Eq. (4-2)
Slope of operating line (CclCh
) , dimensionless
Number of passes in a multipass heat exchanger
Exponent in Eq. (4-1)
Pressure
Porosity of a matrix surface, dimensionless
Heat transfer rate
Heat flux, heat transfer rate per unit of surface area
Universal gas constant
Heat transfer resistance
Resistance on the cold-fluid side of a heat exchanger
Resistance on the hot-fluid side of a heat exchanger
Heat transfer resistance ratio, (R on Cmf• side)j(R on Cmax side)
A radial coordinate
Hydraulic radius (AcL/A) (or pAreLlA for matrix surfaces)
Inner radius of an annulus or inner radius of a circular fin
Outer radius of an annulus or outer radius of a circular fin
rJro
Absolute temperature
Temperature to any arbitrary scale
Cold-fluid-side temperature
Hot-fluid-side temperature
Unit overall thermal conductance
Velocity
Volume
k
L
1
M
m
m
k
L
1
M
m
m
k
L
1
M
m
m
k
L
1
M
m
m
k
L
1
M
m
m
k
L
1
M
m
m
k
L
1
M
k
L

Nomenclature xiii
v Specific volume
W Mass flow rate
X Parameter in the log-mean rate equation approach to heat exchanger design
X Parameter in Fig. 3-6
X, Specific-heat correction factor for humidity and products of combustion
Xd Density correction factor for humidity and products of combustion
x Axial flow coordinate
XO Axial flow coordinate (x/L), dimensionless
Xl Longitudinal-tube pitch ratio in a circular tube bank (Fig. 7-5), dimension￾less
x, Transverse-tube pitch ratio in a circular tube bank (Fig. 7-5), dimensionless
Y Parameter in Fig. 3-6
Z Parameter in the log-mean rate equation approach to heat exchanger design
Z Influence coefficient for annulus heat transfer [Eqs. (6-1) and (6-2)]
e
a
f3
["
TO
B
B
Bd
ed,min
Bd,max
Br
BO
I'
P
w
A
1]1
1]0
<I>
Greek Letter Symbols
a Ratio of total transfer area on one side of the exchanger to total volume of
the exchanger
For matrix surfaces a = A/AfrLfor either one side or both sides
Aspect ratio of a rectangular flow passage (b/a), dimensionless
Ratio of total heat transfer area on one side of a plate-fin heat exchanger to
the volume between the plates on that side
Denotes difference
Fin thickness
Denotes difference
Exchanger effectiveness, dimensionless [Eq. (2-6)]
Effectiveness of one pass of a multipass heat exchanger, dimensionless
Outlet-fluid temperature response to a step change in one of the fluid inlet
temperatures, dimensionless
Wall temperature response at the fluid outlet section to a step change in
fluid inlet temperature, dimensionless
Parameter defined by either Eq. (2-15) or Eq. (2-19), dimensionless
Parameter defined by Eq. (2-16), dimensionless
Longitudinal conduction parameter defined by Eq. (2-25), dimensionless
Fin temperature effectiveness, dimensionless [Eq. (2-4)]
Total surface temperature effectiveness, dimensionless [Eq. (2-3)]
Indicates "function of"
Ratio of free-flow area to frontal area, Ac/Afr. dimensionless
Viscosity coefficient
Density
Absolute humidity
Unit surface shear stress
Time
Angular position coordinate in a circular tube (see Fig. 6-1)
Dwell time, exchanger residence time for a fluid (L/V)
Bd
for the Cmin fluid
Bd
for the Cm ax fluid
Rotor rotation period for a periodic-flow heat exchanger
Generalized time parameter for a direct-transfer exchanger (BIBd
•m in ) , di￾mensionless

xiv Nomenclature
0;; Dwell time ratio (Od,ml./Od,max)' dimensionless
0; Generalized time parameter for a periodic-flow exchanger (O/Or)
Dimensionless Groupings
Re Reynolds number (4rhG//t), a flow modulus
Red Reynolds number (dC//t)
St Stanton number (h/Cc p
) , a heat transfer modulus
Nu Nusselt number (h4rh/k), a heat transfer modulus
Pr Prandtl number (/tcp/k), a fluid properties modulus
Ntu Number of heat transfer units of an exchanger, a heat transfer parameter
(AU/Cm ;. ) ; more formally defined by Eq. (2-7)
Cml./Cmax Flow-stream capacity-rate ratio [(Wcp)ml.!(Wcp)maxl
Subscripts
a Air side
av Average
C Cold-fluid side of heat exchanger
h Hot-fluid side of heat exchanger
i Refers to inner surface of an annular passage or inner radius of a circular fin
L Coupling liquid in a liquid-coupled heat exchanger
rn Mean conditions, defined as used
o Refers to conditions at surface, or specifically to inner surface of an annular
passage or inner radius of a circular fin
p Refers to one pass of a multipass heat exchanger
r Matrix rotor
w Wall; water side
x Local conditions
00 Conditions far downstream
ii Conditions at inner surface of an annular passage when the inner surface
alone is heated
00 Conditions at outer surface of an annular passage when the outer surface
alone is heated
1,2 Indicate different sides of the heat exchanger; inlet and outlet conditions
max Maximum
min Minimum
lrna Log mean average
The following symbols and systems of units are used:
English SI
Mass
Force
Length
Time
Thermal energy
Power
Temperature
Pressure
Ibm (pound mass)
Ibf(pound force)
ft, in (foot, inch)
s, h (second, hour)
Btu (British thermal unit)
Btu/s, Btu/h. hp (horsepower)
OF, OR (degree Fahrenheit, de￾gree Rankine)
Ibf
/ft2
kg (kilogram)
N (newton, kg/(m' S2))
m (meter)
s (second)
1(joule, N· m)
W (watt, l/s)
K, °C (kelvin, degree Celsius)
Pa (pascal, N/m 2
)

Nomenclature xv
Under the English System, the proportionality factor in Newton's second law
becomes gc = 32.2 Ibm'ft/(lbf
' S2), and the universal gas constant becomes
R = 1,545 ft ·lbr/Obm·mol, R). In the SI, gc has the value of unity and is dimen￾sionless. The universal gas constant is R = 8,314 J/(kmol' K).
Note the dimensions consistently employed for the following properties,
coefficients, and variables:
Density p
Viscosity Ii
Thermal conductivity k
Specific heat cp
Heat transfer coefficient h
Heat flux q"
Mass flow rate W
Molecular weight M
English
Ib"jft3
Ib"j(h· ft)
Btu/(h' ft2
• °F/ft)
Btu/(lbm.OF)
Btu/(h· ft 2
• OF)
Btu/(h· ft 2
)
Ibm/h
Ibm/(lbm'mole)
SI
kg/m"
Pa-s, N's/m2
W/(m·k)
kJ/(kg' k)
W/(m2·k)
W/m2
kg/s
kg/kmol
Table A-IS in App. A contains a set of conversion factors for shifting from one
system of units to another, including some of the commonly used archaic units.

Preface to the Reprint Edition
Since the 1984 edition went out of print about three years ago the authors have
received a continuous stream of letters and phone calls, primarily from people
engaged in design of compact heat exchangers, or in design studies, all wanting to
know how they could purchase or otherwise get their hands on a copy. It soon
became evident that there exists really no adequate substitute for this compilation
of design data.
This reprint is essentially the same as the previous 1984 edition (with errors
corrected) and thus does not include any data obtained since that date, although
the amount of such recent data appears to be small. So it does still include the
largest collection of compact heat exchanger data available in the world today and
is still unique in that all of these data are presented in a consistent manner
so that comparisons can be readily made. A large portion of these data was
obtained in a single test system which simply adds to comparability as well as
reliability. The availability of a large collection of data for heat transfer surfaces
with relatively small geometric differences also makes it feasible to infer with
some confidence the behavior ofother, non-tested, heat transfer surfaces by inter￾polation.
Until a more complete compilation of data becomes available it is our hope that
this edition will satisfy the needs of heat exchanger designers in all those various
fields involving heat transfer to and from gases where light weight and small size
are of critical importance.
W.M. Kays

Preface to the
Third Edition
It is now 19 years since the second edition of Compact Heat Exchangers was
published. In the intervening years manufacturing techniques have been devel￾oped to fabricate some of the older compact surface configurations using high￾temperature materials, new surface configurations with superior flow charac￾teristics have been manufactured, and the area per unit volume has been
increased substantially. The research program which generated the original data
on which this book is based was slowed down and eventually terminated, but a
number ofthe newer surfaces were tested using essentially the same techniques
as were used for the earlier work.
In the meantime new research on some ofthe theoretical solutions for flow in
the simple geometries has rendered obsolete some ofthe solutions presented in
the second edition. The same thing can be said of the solutions for the transient
behavior of heat exchangers.
The availability of new data and more modern solutions suggested that the
time was appropriate for a new edition. This edition does not differ radically
from its predecessor but it does contain the basic test data for 11 new surface
configurations, including some of the very compact ceramic matrices. In addi￾tion to modernization of the theoretical solutions and correlations for simple
geometries, and the transient solutions, a number of other improvements will be
found. Finally, the slow conversion (at least in the United States) to the Systeme
Internationale (SI) system of units suggested that the time had come to make that
conversion in Compact Heat Exchangers. Since the English system is apparently
destined to disappear only slowly in the United States, it was decided to intro￾duce a dual system of units in the new edition. So all dimensions are given in both
systems, and the fluid properties in the Appendix are likewise presented in both
systems.
A unique feature of Compact Heat Exchangers has always been that virtually
all of the basic test data originate from a single research program under the
supervision of the authors. There is thus no question about the comparability of
the test results of one surface to another. In recent years additional data have
been obtained by others, but the authors have chosen to maintain the original
tradition so that there is almost complete internal consistency.
W. M. Kays
A. L. London

Preface to the
Second Edition
For many years the only generally available basic heat transfer and flow-friction
data of sufficient accuracy for heat-exchanger design was for flow through and
over banks of circular tubes. The need for small-size and lightweight heat
exchangers in all varieties of powered vehicles from automobiles to spacecraft,
as well as in a multitude of other applications, has resulted in the development of
many heat transfer surfaces that are much more compact than can be practically
realized with circular tubes. In addition, many of these surfaces possess other
characteristics that are superior to circular tubes. However, lack of basic heat
transfer and flow-friction design data, and a lack of understanding of the basic
mechanisms involved, for a long period of time restricted their use to heat
exchangers that could be developed by cut-and-try methods. It ultimately
became apparent that rationally optimized heat-exchanger design, the develop￾ment of new surfaces of superior characteristics, and the development of
methods of fabrication of compact surfaces for high-temperature service could
only take place after the basic characteristics of the already existing surfaces
were known and understood.
Recognizing the need for such data the U.S. Navy Bureau ofShips initiated in
1945 a test program at the Naval Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis,
Maryland. In 1947, the Office of Naval Research, in cooperation with the
Bureaus of Ships and Aeronautics, extended this work by establishing a similar
program at Stanford University. Later the Atomic Energy Commission joined in
support.
A number of manufacturers provided test cores for these investigations, and
the authors acknowledge especially the cooperation of the Harrison Radiator
Division of General Motors, Lockport, New York; the Modine Manufacturing
Company, Racine, Wisconsin; The Trane Company, LaCrosse, Wisconsin; The
AiResearch Manufacturing Company, Los Angeles, California; and The Ferro￾therm Company, Cleveland, Ohio.
Most of the test cores were of low-temperature construction employing
soldering or brazing techniques. However, the primary objective of this pro￾gram was to investigate the effects of geometry on convective heat transfer and
flow-friction performance, with the hope that the geometrical advantages would
provide incentive for the development of high-temperature fabrication tech￾niques and of new superior surfaces. Since the first publications of the results of
the program, both kinds of developments have indeed occurred.

x Preface to the Second Edition
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers published the first results of
the program in 1951 in a monograph entitled Gas Turbine Plant Heat Ex￾changers-Basic Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Design Data, by W. M. Kays,
A. L. London, and D. W. Johnson. In 1955, Compact Heat Exchangers, by W. M.
Kays and A. L. London, was published; it contained a considerable additional
body of basic data from the test program, as well as data from other investigators.
Following the publication of Compact Heat Exchangers, the test program was
continued, and new test cores were obtained, some of which were developed
directly as a result of the earlier work. This second edition of Compact Heat
Exchangers contains all the new basic data that have been obtained, as well as
extensive revisions and additions to the chapters on analytic solutions for flow in
tubes, an extension of the chapter on heat exchanger design theory, and a new
chapter on the transient behavior of heat exchangers; various other sections
have been brought up to date in the light ofmore recent research. The basic data
section has been expanded to include the characteristics of 25 new surfaces, and
this section, reporting the characteristics of more than 90 surfaces, remains the
real core of the book.
Although too numerous to name specifically, the authors take this opportu￾nity to acknowledge the assistance over the past 15 years of the approximately
60 Stanford University mechanical engineering students who participated in
various phases of the test program. Without their assistance this book could
never have been written.
W. M. Kays
A. L. London

Contents
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Appendix A
Appendix B
Appendix C
Preface to the Reprint Edition vi
Preface to the Third Edition vii
Preface to the Second Edition ix
Nomenclature xi
Introduction 1
Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 11
The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 79
The Effects of Temperature-Dependent Fluid
Properties............................................................................... 102
Abrupt Contraction and Expansion Pressure-Loss
Coefficients 108
Analytic Solutions for Flow in Tubes 115
Experimental Correlations for Simple Geometries 140
Experimental Methods 152
Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 156
Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 186
Material Properties 280
Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance
Calculations 302
Derivation of e-Ntu Relations 326
Index 333

1
Introduction
The design of a heat exchanger involves a consideration of both the heat transfer
rates between the fluids and the mechanical pumping power expended to
overcome fluid friction and move the fluids through the heat exchanger. For a
heat exchanger operating with high-density fluids, the friction-power expendi￾ture is generally small relative to the heat transfer rate, with the result that the
friction-power expenditure is seldom of controlling influence. However, for
low-density fluids, such as gases, it is very easy to expend as much mechanical
energy in overcoming friction power as is transferred as heat. And it should be
remembered that in most thermal power systems mechanical energy is worth 4
to 10 times as much as its equivalent in heat.
It can be readily shown that for most flow passages that might be used for the
heat transfer surfaces of an exchanger, the heat transfer rate per unit of surface
area can be increased by increasing fluid-flow velocity, and this rate varies as
something less than the first power ofthe velocity. The friction-power expendi￾ture is also increased with flow velocity, but in this case the power varies by as
much as the cube of the velocity and never less than the square. It is this
behavior that allows the designer to match both heat transfer rate and friction
(pressure-drop) specifications, and it is this behavior that dictates many of the
characteristics of different classes of heat exchangers.
Ifthe friction-power expenditure in a particular application tends to be high,
the designer can reduce flow velocities by increasing the number of flow
passages in the heat exchanger. This will also decrease the heat transfer rate per
unit of surface area, but according to the above relations the reduction in heat
transfer rate will be considerably less than the friction-power reduction. The
loss of heat transfer rate is then made up by increasing the surface area (length￾ening the tubes), which in turn also increases the friction-power expenditure,
but only in the same proportion as the heat transfer surface area is increased.
In gas-flow heat exchangers the friction-power limitations generally force the
designer to arrange for moderately low mass velocities. Low mass velocities,
together with the low thermal conductivities of gases (low relative to most

2 Compact Heat Exchangers
liquids), result in low heat transfer rates per unit of surface area. Thus large
amounts of surface area become a typical characteristic of gas-flow heat ex￾changers. Gas-to-gas heat exchangers may require up to 10 times the surface
area of condensers or evaporators or Iiquid-to-liquid heat exchangers in which
the total heat transfer rates and pumping-power requirements are comparable.
For example, a regenerator for a gas-turbine plant, if it is to be effective, requires
several times as much heat transfer surface as the combined boiler and con￾denser in a steam power plant of comparable power capacity.
These considerations have led to the development of many ways to construct
heat transfer surfaces for gas-flow applications in which the surface area density
is large. Such surfaces will be referred to here as compact heat transfer surfaces.
Several typical compact heat transfer surface arrangements are illustrated in
Fig. 1-1.
Perhaps the simplest and most common surface arrangement for a two-fluid
heat exchanger isthe circular tube bundle shown in Fig. 1-1a. This arrangement,
of course, has long been used for both high- and low-density fluids, but the only
way in which surface area density can be substantially increased is to decrease
the diameter ofthe tubes. Fabrication difficulties and cost place a rather severe
limitation on what can be accomplished in this direction, and large heat ex￾changers with tube diameters of less than tin. (0.006 m) are rare.
An effective way to increase surface area density is to make use ofsecondary
surfaces, or fins, on one or both fluid sides ofthe surface. Figure I-lb illustrates a
finned circular tube surface in which circular fins have been attached to the
outside of circular tubes. Such an arrangement is frequently used in gas-to-liquid
heat exchangers where optimum design demands a maximum ofsurface area on
the gas side. Fins could be used in a liquid-to-liquid heat exchanger, or on the
liquid side of a gas-to-liquid heat exchanger, but here another difficulty arises.
The low friction-power requirement characteristic of high-density fluids, to￾gether with the relatively high thermal conductivity of liquids, results in high
convection heat transfer rates in any optimum design (high heat transfer coeffi￾cients). If fins are employed, the high heat transfer rates must be conducted
along the fins, and the conduction resistance may destroy all or most of the
advantage of the extra surface area gained (see the discussion offin effectiveness
in Chap. 2).
Another popular variation of the flnned-tube arrangement is shown in Fig.
I-Ie. Here the tubes are illustrated as flat, but they can also be circular.
In compact gas-to-gas heat exchangers, large area density is desirable on both
fluid sides, and a method for accomplishing this objective with fins is illustrated
by the plate-fin arrangement of Figs. I-ld and e. The heat exchanger is built up
as a sandwich of flat plates bonded to interconnecting fins. The two fluids are
carried between alternate pairs of plates and can be arranged in either counter￾flow or crossflow, which provides an added degree of flexibility in this arrange￾ment.
Figure I-Ie also illustrates another variation; the nns can be interrupted
rather than continuous, an arrangement which alters the basic convection heat
transfer and flow-friction characteristics in a manner that will be discussed
presently.

Introduction 3
Fig. 1-1 Some typical examples of compact heat exchanger surfaces.
(a)
(e)
/1
(e)
(b)
(d)
(I)
In the periodic-flow-type heat exchanger, energy is transferred by convec￾tion and stored in a matrix, from which it is later given up to the other fluid.
Figure I-If illustrates one such compact matrix, which could be built up of
stacks of solid rods or stacks of wire screens. Matrices can also be constructed
using stacks of plates and fins or simply packed bundles of tubes. Some of the
most common matrices are made using glass ceramic materials.
An interesting and important feature of the compact heat transfer surfaces
illustrated in Fig. 1-1 can be demonstrated if the heat transfer rate per unit of
surface area is plotted as a function of the mechanical power expended to

(1-1)
(1-2)
4 Compact Heat Exchangers
overcome fluid friction per unit of surface area. Such a plot for three different
surfaces is shown in Fig. 1-2. The heat transfer rate for a unit of area and for one
degree oftemperature difference is merely the heat transfer coefficient h evalu￾ated for some particular set of fluid properties from
h = .5d!:...- _1_ (StPr2/3)Re
Pr 2
/
3
4Th
The friction power expended per unit ofsurface area can be readily evaluated as
a function of the Reynolds number, the friction factor, and the specified fluid
properties from
1 /13 ( 1 )3 E=-2" - fRe 3
2gc P 4Th
A plot of hversus E can be prepared once the basic convection heat transfer
and friction characteristics are known as functions ofthe Reynolds number. Any
particular surface arrangement is then represented by a single curve on a plot
such as that in Fig. 1-2 [for fluid properties of air at 1 atm and 5000F (260°C)).
Fig. 1-2 A comparison of heat transfer and friction-power characteristics of three compact surfaces on a
unit of surface area basis. Dimensions are in Btu/(h . ft2 • OF) for h and in hp/ft2 for E. Geometrical
descriptions of the surfaces are provided in Chap. 9.
I I I
0
'/8- 2 0. 0 6(0) -1\ 0
0
0
100 0 f.- N
0
'"
f.- 0
80 0 0
0 10- 0
0
0
'" 60 Re 0
I-" g-f---r-~
'" - -
0 <;>-f---f￾0
40 f-
'" ';, I-- 0
V
v 0
J:.
0 0
f- 0 0 0
0
0 .. N .. 0 0
..loV
20 f--- 0
0
"
0
<;> _....I--'"V "-- 46.45 T
-'"
-
- 16.96 T
.0
£,
I
0.00 2 0.004 0.01 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0 •• '.0
The interesting feature of this plot is the very wide difference in friction￾power expenditure for a given heat flux for different surfaces, or conversely, the
smaller difference in heat flux for a given friction-power expenditure. At the
beginning ofthis chapter the important influence offriction-power expenditure
on heat exchanger design was discussed, and in gas-flow heat exchangers it is the
necessity to minimize friction power that forces the use of large amounts of
surface area. This in turn has resulted in the development ofmore compact heat

Introduction 5
transfer surfaces, but it is apparent from Fig. 1-2 that another way to minimize
friction power is to select surfaces that plot "high" on a heat transfer-friction
power plot, such as Fig. 1-2.
Itshould be emphasized that selection of a surface configuration for a particu￾lar application is by no means as simple as this, for there are many additional
considerations. However, other things being equal, three heat exchangers de￾signed for identical thermal and pressure-drop performance and using the three
surfaces represented on Fig. 1-2 will have quite different volumes and weights,
and the smallest and lightest will be based on the surface configuration desig￾nated t-20.06(D), the upper curve. However, this design will probably have a
significantly larger frontal area, even though volume is smallest, and this mayor
may not be desirable.
A surface which has a basic characteristic of high heat flux relative to friction￾power expenditure will be termed a high-performance surface. There remains
the question of why some heat transfer surfaces have this characteristic.
It should first be noted that compactness itself leads to high performance. A
compact surface has small flow passages, and the heat transfer coefficient h
always varies as a negative power ofthe hydraulic diameter ofthe passage. Thus
compact surfaces tend, by their very nature, to have high heat transfer coeffi￾cients; this leads to high-performance curves on the heat transfer-friction
power plot, despite the influence of small hydraulic diameter on the friction
power, as might be noted in Eq. (1-2).
In addition to the influence of small hydraulic diameter, however, high-per￾formance characteristics can be obtained by any modification of the surface
geometry that results in a higher heat transfer coefficient at a given flow velocity.
One of the most widely used ways of increasing conductance is to interrupt the
wall surfaces so that the boundary layers can never become thick. Figure 1-1
illustrates such an interrupted surface. Finned surfaces lend themselves espe￾cially conveniently to such treatment. Surface interruption also increases fric￾tion factors, but a small increase in heat transfer coefficient can more than offset
a large friction factor increase, because flow velocity can then be decreased and
friction power varies with as much as the cube of the velocity.
Other methods of obtaining high performance by change offlow-tube geom￾etry include the use of curved or wavy passages in which boundary-layer
separation is induced. A tube bank in which a fluid flows normal to the tubes is a
high-performance surface, since a new boundary layer builds on each tube, and
the result is much higher heat transfer coefficients than can be obtained by flow
of the same velocity through the inside of the tubes. Various types of inserts
(turbulence promoters) are frequently used inside a tube to increase the heat
transfer coefficient, but this scheme is not nearly as effective as directly inter￾rupting the boundary-layer sublayers on the heat transfer surface.
It is clear that compact high-performance heat transfer surfaces can be
manufactured in a very large variety of geometrical configurations and that, for
many applications, the most desirable surfaces are those ofvery complex geome￾try. Only for the geometrically simple surface does a completely analytic treat￾ment to establish the basic characteristics appear feasible; for all others, the

6 Compact Heat Exchangers
basic characteristics can be reliably established only by experiments and by
making use of model laws to extend the range of applicability of the results.
The primary objectives of this book are to present the results of a very large
number ofsuch experiments, employing a single consistent method of presenta￾tion. Chapter 10 contains these experimental data in tables and in 132 graphs,
covering a sufficiently wide range of geometrical configurations so that it is
possible to deduce at least approximately the characteristics of many others
merely by interpolation. The complete set of geometries covered is assembled
for quick reference and comparison in Figs. 9-1 to 9-17.
An interesting feature ofinterrupted-fin surfaces is that their range of useful￾ness tends to be limited to a range ofReynolds numbers which for a smooth tube
would extend from the high laminar region to the low Reynolds number turbu￾lent region. Typically this implies Reynolds numbers (based on hydraulic diame￾ter) from about 500 to 15,000, which of course includes the transition region.
Outside of this range the interrupted-fin surfaces tend to lose their advantage
and smooth passages serve just as well. It develops that a great many gas-flow
applications fall in this range ofReynolds numbers for reasons having to do with
the amount of friction power it is economical to expend relative to the heat
transferred (this is associated with minimizing thermodynamic irreversibility),
and with the practicability of manufacturing small, compact flow passages. With
the advent of the manufacturability of very compact matrices for periodic-flow
heat exchangers, made often from glass ceramics, the Reynolds number range of
interest tends to extend to quite low laminar-flow Reynolds numbers. In such
cases the interrupted-fin "high-performance" surfaces no longer show an ad￾vantage, and simple smooth passages are generally preferred. Since the flow
passages tend to have very large length-to-diameter ratios, the flow is usually
"fully developed," and the simple analytic solutions for fully developed flow
become applicable.
SOURCES OF DATA
The great bulk of the experimental data presented here was obtained directly
from two research programs. The first took place at the U.S. Navy Engineering
Experiment Station and was supported by the U.S. Navy Bureau of Ships. A
description of the experimental apparatus and the method of data reduction is
given in London and Ferguson [I). The second program was at Stanford Univer￾sity under the joint sponsorship of the Office of Naval Research, the Bureau of
Ships, the Bureau of Aeronautics, and the Atomic Energy Commission. The
experimental apparatus is described by Kays and London [2). Actually, the
experimental systems were quite similar, and cross-checks using the same test
cores indicated that they yielded very consistent results.
The matrix surfaces were tested by a totally different technique. The test
system and method of reduction of data are described by Wheeler [3).
The complete test data are available in a series of project reports. Only the
summarized data are presented here.

Introduction 7
A certain amount of data from other investigators is also included and is
referenced as it appears. In general, the authors have preferred to include only
data obtained by using approximately the same procedures as the projects
mentioned above, so that a truly consistent treatment is possible. In some cases,
the authors have reevaluated the data of others, again for consistency of treat￾ment.
A considerable number of analytic convection solutions pertinent to compact
heat exchangers have been included, and the sources ofthese are referenced as
they appear.
All the experimental data presented have been obtained from experiments
using air (Pr = 0.7) as a working fluid, since the major interest in compact heat
exchangers is for gas-flow applications. The applicability of the data to fluids
outside the gas Prandtl number range may be open to some question and
depends upon the particular geometry and what is known ofthe influence ofthe
Prandtl number. The analytic solutions are more general in this regard and, for
some cases, cover the complete Prandtl number spectrum ranging from the
liquid metals through gases, water, and viscous liquids.
METHOD OF PRESENTATION OF BASIC TEST DATA
One ofthe present objectives is to use a common treatment of basic heat transfer
and flow-friction design data for all the surfaces considered, so as to avoid the
confusion often encountered with a large number of arbitrarily defined parame￾ters. It is quite feasible to use the same definition of parameters like friction
factor or hydraulic diameter for such widely differing surface geometries as flow
through tubes and flow normal to banks of tubes; the resulting simplification for
the heat exchanger designer is quite apparent. For all the data presented the
following format is employed.
The basic heat transfer and flow-friction performance data for each surface
are presented in both tabular and graphical form as
StPrZ
/
3 = cPl(Re)
f= cPz(Re)
(1-3)
(1-4)
The Prandtl number was not a test variable, but the two-thirds power of the
Prandtl number is included as an approximation over a moderate range of
Prandtl numbers and should be at least adequate for all gases. A large number of
the surfaces considered are ofthe interrupted-fin variety, with a laminar bound￾ary layer on a major part of the surface. The analytic solutions for laminar￾boundary-layer heat transfer indicate that the Prandtl number enters as about
the two-thirds power for the Prandtl number range 0.5 to 15. For turbulent flow
in tubes, the available analytic solutions suggest that in the gas range the Prandtl
number enters as nearer the one-half power, but the two-thirds power has been
retained here for consistency and will lead to little error in the gas range of
Prandtl numbers (0.5 to 1.0). For laminar flow in long tubes, the Prandtl number
effect is closer to a 1.0 power, but for finite tubes of the length typically

(1-5)
8 Compact Heat Exchangers
employed in heat exchangers, the two-thirds power is again near correct. The
two-thirds power is thus a reasonable compromise and does allow presentation
ofthe complete characteristics ofa surface on a single graph where the Reynolds
number range covers both laminar and turbulent flow.
There are a few exceptions to the above method ofpresentation. The Nusselt
number (Nu) is employed as a heat transfer parameter in place of the Stanton
number (St) in the analytic solutions given in Chap. 6. In the summaries of
analysis and experiment in Chap. 7, the length-to-diameter ratio of a tube, L/D
or L/4rh, is employed as an additional parameter in certain cases. Also, a
temperature ratio, Tw/Tm , is employed in some cases in the summaries of Chap.
7. The reasons for using a temperature ratio are fully discussed in Chap. 4, where
the effects of temperature-dependent fluid properties are considered.
The mass velocity G in the Stanton and Reynolds numbers is, in all cases
except matrix surfaces,'evaluated on the basis ofthe minimum free-flow area Ae
,
regardless of where this minimum occurs in the passage. Thus G = W/Ae
• In the
case of matrices, G = W/pAfr, where the porosity p and the frontal area Afr
combine to yield an "effective" free-flow area pAfr corresponding to Ac
•
The Reynolds number is based on a hydraulic diameter defined as
Dh = 4rh = 4 Ae
L L A
where L is the flow length of the heat exchanger, Ae
is the flow cross-sectional
area, and A is the total heat transfer area. For flow normal to tube banks, L is an
equivalent flow length measured from the leading edge of the first tube row to
the leading edge of a tube row that would follow the last tube row, were another
tube row present.
For any cylindrical tube, Eq. (1-5) reduces to the conventional definition of
hydraulic diameter, i.e., four times cross-sectional area divided by wetted perim￾eter. For a tube of circular cross section, 4rh is simply tube diameter. The use of
this parameter as the geometry dimension in the Reynolds number in no way
implies that the basic heat transfer and flow-friction performance of different
geometric configurations can be correlated thereby. In fact, the heat transfer
performance for flow normal to banks of circular tubes with differing patterns
can be better correlated by using the outside tube diameter in the Reynolds
number if correlation is what is desired. However, the present objective is a
simple and consistent treatment, and the above definition of hydraulic diameter
can be applied to any kind of interior heat transfer surface without ambiguity,
providing that one does not attempt to apply the test data from one surface to a
geometrically dissimilar surface. Furthermore, in heat exchanger design work,
A/Ae = L/rh is a directly useful parameter in its own right.
Friction factor is defined on the basis of an equivalent shear force in the flow
direction per unit of heat transfer (or friction) area. Whether this equivalent
shear force is a true viscous shear or is primarily a pressure force, as in the case of
tube banks, is of no consequence. For most of the surfaces considered it is a
combination of viscous shear (skin friction) and pressure force (form drag), but

Introduction 9
there is no reason in design work to attempt to separate these effects. With such
a definition of the friction factor, a common treatment of all types ofsurfaces is
possible. Thus
fG2
To =P2g
c
or f= G~;~gc (1-6)f
For flow through cylindrical tubes, fin Eq. (1-6) is the same as the conven￾tional Fanning friction factor and is also identical to the conventional drag
coefficient for flow along flat surfaces. To determine pressure drop in a heat
exchanger core, there are other effects besides flow friction, and a complete
force-momentum equation, including the friction factor term, is given in Chap.
2. It is again emphasized that this definition of the friction factor, and the
integrated form of the force-momentum equation as given in Chap. 2, applies
equally well to flow through tubes and flow normal to banks oftubes ofany type.
The fluid properties in all the experimentally determined basic heat transfer
and flow-friction design data were evaluated at a bulk average fluid temperature.
The effects oftemperature-dependent fluid properties are discussed in Chap. 4.
SUMMARY OF CONTENTS
Chapter 2 contains a summary ofthe design theory necessary to predict the heat
transfer and pressure-drop behavior of a heat exchanger. Included are the
solutions, in both tabular and graphical form, for a large number of heat ex￾changer flow arrangements, presented as effectiveness, e, versus number of heat
transfer units, Ntu • Equations for the evaluation ofheat-exchanger-core pressure
drop are also presented.
The transient behavior of heat exchangers is considered in Chap. 3. Included
are graphs from which thermal lags can be evaluated for several common types
of heat exchangers and also for ducting or piping.
The effects of temperature-dependent fluid properties on heat transfer ~nd
flow friction in gas-flow heat exchangers are discussed in Chap. 4. Included are
recommendations for corrections to be made for these effects during design.
Chapter 5 contains graphs of heat-exchanger-core abrupt contraction and
expansion pressure-loss coefficients for various types of surface geometries.
These are used to evaluate pressure losses at the core entrance and exit arising
from boundary-layer separation.
A number of analytic solutions for heat transfer and flow friction in smooth
tubes are summarized in Chap. 6. Extensive data on the concentric-circular-tube
annulus are presented, including procedures for handling asymmetric heating
from the two surfaces of an annulus. Rectangular and triangular tubes are also
treated, although somewhat less completely. The analytic solutions presented in
t &, in Eq. (1-6) is the proportionality factor in Newton's second law. In the 51 system of
dimensions &, has the value of 1.0 and is dimensionless. In English units &, = 32.2
(Ibm' ft)/(lbj
' S2).

10 Compact Heat Exchangers
Chap. 6 are not restricted to the Prandti number range of gases, as are the
experimental data which form the main body ofthis book, and thus may be used
for liquids, including liquid metals.
For certain heat transfer surfaces of simple flow geometry, sufficient data
have been obtained, both experimental and analytic, so that a generalized
treatment can be presented. Summaries of data for gas flow through circular
tubes and rectangular tubes of various aspect ratio, flow normal to banks of
staggered circular tubes, and flow through stacked-screen matrices are pre￾sented in Chap. 7. Where applicable, these data are recommended for design
purposes rather than the experimental data of Chap. 10, except for those cases
where the design surface is identical to a particular surface considered in
Chap.lO.
In Chap. 8 a brief description is given ofthe test apparatus and methods used
to obtain the data in Chap. 10.
Chapter 9 contains a summary of all the pertinent geometrical data for the
test surfaces ofChap. 10. These data are presented in tables; diagrams of all the
test surfaces are also shown.
Chapter 10 comprises the main body of this book. Basic heat transfer and
flow-friction test data for a wide variety of compact high-performance surfaces
are presented in 132 graphs.
Appendix A contains a compilation offluid properties useful in application of
compact heat transfer surfaces.
Appendix B contains several illustrative heat exchanger analyses to demon￾strate a procedure for using the design data.
Appendix C presents in detail the derivation ofsome of the effectiveness-Ni,
relationships presented in Chap. 2.
REFERENCES
1. London, A. L., and C. K. Ferguson: Test Results of High Performance Heat Exchanger
Surfaces Used in Aircraft Intercoolers and Their Significance for Gas Turbine Regener￾ator Design, Trans. ASME, vol. 71, p. 17, 1949.
2. Kays, W. M., and A. L. London: Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of
Some Compact Heat Exchanger Surfaces-Part I: Test System and Procedure, Trans.
ASME, vol. 72, pp. 1075-1085, 1950.
3. Wheeler, A.J.: Single-Blow Transient Testing of Matrix-Type Heat Exchanger Surfaces
at Low Values ofN,u' Technical Report No. 68, Contract Nonr 225(91), Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, May 1968.

2
Heat Exchanger Thermal and
Pressure-Drop Design
The purpose of this chapter is to summarize exchanger heat transfer and flow￾friction performance theory. Designers use this theory in conjunction with the
basic design data reported in Chaps. 6, 7, and 10 to size the heat exchanger core
for a specified heat transfer duty and pressure drop. This theory also provides
designers with the equations to use in optimizing their designs on the basis of
whatever criteria they may select for this purpose.
Details of the derivation of the final equations are omitted here but are
included for some cases in Appendix C to illustrate the general method of
approach. Where available, literature references are provided for the cases not
covered in Appendix C. Major emphasis is placed on the basic principles and the
conceptual ideas employed, together with the engineering significance of the
final relationships. These are presented in the form of graphs and tables useful
for design and also in algebraic form when feasible.
Appendix B contains applications ofthe information presented in this chapter
to illustrate the prediction of performance of gas-turbine-plant heat exchangers.
Throughout this section frequent references are made to the gas-turbine-plant
regenerator and intercooler applications, as these are excellent examples of heat
exchangers requiring a refined design. It needs to be emphasized, however, that
the techniques and procedures presented here are broadly applicable to the
design of all classes of unfired heat exchangers.
To summarize briefly, this chapter contains a consideration of the heat
transfer theory of three types of exchanger systems, as follows:
1. The conventional direct-transfer type, in which the two fluids exchanging
thermal energy are separated by the heat transfer surface.
2. The liquid-coupled indirect-transfertype, which consists essentially of two
direct-transfer units coupled with a pumped heat transfer medium. The
transfer fluid circulates between the hot-fluid exchanger, where the ther￾mal energy is picked up, and the cold-fluid exchanger, where the thermal
energy is used to heat the cold fluid. The conventional automobile engine
block and air-cooled radiator system is a common example of a liquid-cou-

12 Compact Heat Exchangers
pled indirect-transfer exchanger; in this case, heat is transferred indirectly
from the combustion products to cooling air.
3. The periodic-flow type, like the common Ljungstrom air preheater, con￾sists of a matrix heat transfer surface which is rotated so that an element is
periodically passed from the hot to the cold flow streams and back again.
As the hot fluid passes through the matrix, the fluid is cooled and the
matrix is heated. In the cold-side part ofthe cycle the cold fluid is heated
and the matrix cooled.
After the development of the heat transfer theory, the prediction of flow
pressure drop is considered. Then a short treatment follows on how one can go
about the task of surface selection for a given application based on a coupling of
the heat transfer and pressure-drop behavior.
Some considerations of the design of flow headers are provided. Also, for
convenience, useful geometrical relations for flow-area, heat transfer area and
detailed core geometry are provided:
The chapter is concluded with a methodology for sizing a core for given heat
transfer and pressure-drop performance.
A COMPREHENSIVE DESIGN PROCEDURE
The methodology of arriving at an optimum heat exchanger design is a complex
one, not only because of the arithmetic involved, but more particularly because
of the many qualitative judgments that must be introduced. To illustrate the
design procedure in a schematic fashion, Fig. 2-1, modified from a presentation
by Mason [1], is given.
The inputs to the design-theory procedure include, along with the problem
statement or specifications, the surface heat transfer and flow-friction design
characteristics and information on physical properties. These last two inputs are
considered in Chaps. 4 to 10 and Appendix A. The problem statement may
specify a consideration of different exchangers, as, for instance, periodic-flow
and direct-transfer types. Several or many surface geometries may be used.
Some options may be allowed in the physical properties; for example, the matrix
material to be used in a periodic-flow-type exchanger.
The design-theory procedure is the main subject ofthis chapter. It can be set
up in a computer program; if it is, the output may be a large number of optional
solutions. Some of these optional solutions may represent an estimate of what a
competitor may offer and others may represent customers' suggestions. These
optional solutions, plus evaluation criteria, serve as the inputs to the evaluation
procedure.
The evaluation procedure is in a large measure qualitative; brazing furnace
size, shipping limitations, delivery dates, company policy, and an estimate ofthe
strength ofthe competition are all examples of qualitative evaluation criteria. In
contrast, trade-offfactors may be developed to quantitatively weigh the relative
costs of pressure drop, weight, heat transfer performance, and leakage (in the
case of the periodic-flow exchangers). A rather startling example ofsuch trade￾off factors is the estimate that a saving of 1 kg is worth $5,000 in a commercial
aircraft application.

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 13
Fig. 2-1 Methodology of heatexchanger design.
SURFACE
CHARACTERISTICS
PROBLEM
SPECIFICATIONS
EVALUATION
CRITERIA
DESIGN
THEORY
PROCEDURE
OPTIONAL
SOLUTIONS
EVALUA TlON
PROCEDURE
The final output is an optimum design or, possibly, several such designs to
submit to the customer. Alternatively, the final output may be used to formulate
a new problem input statement for a parametric study leading to an optimum
overall system rather than just an optimum heat exchanger based on somewhat
arbitrary initial specifications of requirements.
Clearly, a comprehensive design procedure of any generality cannot be
presented in a monograph of this type. What is attempted here is to provide the
quantitative inputs of surface characteristics and a sampling of typical physical
properties information, together with a systematic development of the design
theory. The methodology presented in Fig. 2-1 will be considered again prior to
the illustrative procedure for sizing a heat exchanger that concludes this
chapter.

(2-1)
14 Compact Heat Exchangers
HEAT TRANSFER IN DIRECT-TYPE EXCHANGER
Exchanger Variables- Dimensional and
Nondimensional
For the conventional two-fluid heat exchanger, the parameters relating to heat
transfer performance are as follows:
U = overall conductance for heat transfer, Btu/th : of' ft 2
) of A, or
W/(m2
• K)
A = surface area on which U is based, ft2 or m2
th,in } = hot-fluid terminal temperatures, OF, K, or °C
th,out
tc,in } = cold-fluid terminal temperatures, OF, K, or °C
tc,out
Ch = (WCp)h = hot-fluid capacity rate, Btu/(h . °F)t, W/K, or WrC
C, = (Wcp)c = cold-fluid capacity rate, Btu/(h . °F)t, W/K, or WrC
Flow arrangement = counterflow, parallel flow, crossflow, parallel counterflow,
or combinations of these basic arrangements
The interrelation of these parameters provides the basis for the heat transfer
aspects of exchanger design.
The significance of all the foregoing variables is self-evident, with the excep￾tion of the overall conductance U.This term comes from an overall heat transfer
rate equation which combines the convective and conductive mechanisms re￾sponsible for the heat transfer from the hot to the cold fluid into a single equation
similar to Ohm's law for the steady-state flow of electrical current.
dq
dA = U(th - tJ
here dq/dA is the heat flux per unit transfer area [Btu/(h . ft 2
) or W/m2
) at a
section in the exchanger where the temperature difference is (th
- tc
) ' From this
relation, it is evident that U is an overall thermal conductance based on a
temperature potential (th
- tc
) and a unit transfer area. The reciprocal of U is an
overall thermal resistance which can be considered as having the following
series components:
1. A hot-side convection component, including the temperature ineffective￾ness of the extended surface or fin area on this side
2. A wall-conduction component
3. A cold-side convection component, including the temperature ineffec￾tiveness of the extended area on this side
4. Fouling factors to allow for scaling in service on both the hot and cold sides
t For gas flow, Cp denotes the constant-pressure specific heat in distinction to cv' the
constant-volume specific heat. For liquids (and solids), no such distinction is needed.

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 15
Fig. 2-2 A thermal circuitrepresentation for the heattransferrateequation,
Eq. (2-1).
Units of R, U- 1
: ft2
• 0 F!(Btu!h), m2
• KIW
(
" dq
q ; dA
(2-2)
A thermal circuit expressing this idea, but omitting the fouling factors for
simplicity, is presented in Fig. 2-2. Working equations for the overall thermal
resistance follow:
..!...=_1_+ a + 1
o, YJo.hhh (AjAh)k (AclAh)YJo.A
..!..=_1_+ a + 1
Uc YJo,A (Aw/Ac)k (Ah/Ac)YJo.hhh
where Uh
is based on a unit of hot-side total area (including 6.nor extended area)
and Ue
is based on a unit of cold-side total area. Aw denotes the average wall area;
YJe,h and YJo,c denote the temperature effectiveness of the total area Ah and Ac,
respectively. It is evident from Eqs. (2-2) that UhAh= UcAc.
The convective heat transfer coefficients he and hh are complex functions of
the surface geometry, fluid properties, and flow conditions. Except for some of
the geometrically simple cases, the engineer generally relies on model experi￾ments to establish these coefficients. In Chaps. 6, 7, and 10, these coefficients
are presented in graphical form employing nondimensional parameters. In
Chap. 4, consideration is given to the effects of temperature-dependent fluid
properties on the heat transfer coefficients.
Ifno extended surface is employed on either side, both YJo.h and YJo,c are unity,
Aw= (Ah+ AJ/2, and Eq. (2-2)can be simplified accordingly. However, where
extended surface is employed, temperature gradients along the 6.ns extending
into the fluid reduce the temperature effectiveness of the surface, and YJo is less
than unity as a consequence; YJo is a weighted average of the 100 percent
effectiveness of the prime surface and the less than 100 percent 6.n surface YJf'
Thus
(2-3)
Gardner [2] gives relations for YJffor a number of6.n geometries. For many of the
heat transfer surfaces considered here, the relation for the straight fin with
constant-conduction cross section may be used to a good approximation.
1
(AclAh)YJo.A

16 Compact Heat Exchangers
(2-4)
(2-5)
where
tanh ml
1'/f= ml
m = {"fj for thin sheet fins
m = ...Jf!j for circular pin fins
When the fin extends from wall to wall, the effective fin length 1is half the wall
spacing. This relation is shown graphically in Fig. 2-13. Also shown is 1'/f
for an
annular circular fin of the type quite commonly employed on the outside of
circular tubes. The circular-fin solution is plotted as a family of curves going in
the limiting case to the behavior of a straight fin [Eq. (2-4)).
In the usual gas-to-gas or gas-to-liquid heat exchanger, the wall-resistance
component in Eq. (2-2) may be neglected relative to the fluid-side resistances. In
a gas-to-liquid exchanger, such as a water-cooled intercooler, the air-side resist￾ance component is usually much greater than that on the water side and is said to
control the heat transfer. For a gas-to-gas exchanger, the two resistances may be
of comparable magnitude.
The heat transfer rate equation (2-1) must be combined with an energy
equation, equating the loss of enthalpy ofthe hot fluid to the gain of enthalpy of
the cold fluid, in order to relate the heat exchanger variables listed at the
beginning of this discussion. These variables are too numerous to permit ready
graphical description of their relation. However, they may be judiciously
grouped into a smaller number of nondimensional parameters which do allow
such a representation. The nondimensional groupings selected as most conve￾nient and possessing the most readily visualized physical significance will now
be named and defined.
EXCHANGER HEAT TRANSFER EFFECTIVENESS
e = -.!l.- = Ch(th,in - th,out) = Ce(te,out - te,in)
qmax Cmin(th,in - te,in) Cmin(th,in - te,in)
where Cmin is the smaller of the Ch and Ce magnitudes.
(2-6)
NUMBER OF EXCHANGER HEAT TRANSFER UNITS
N = AUav = _I_fA U dA
tu C min C min 0
(2-7)
where A is the same transfer area as used in the definition of U. In design work U
can generally be treated as constant.
CAPACITY-RATE RATIO
(2-8)

(2-9)
Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 17
where C min and C max are, respectively, the smaller and the larger of the two
magnitudes Ch and Ce
•
In general, it is possible to express
m ( C
min
e = w N fl ) tu , C
max'
ow arrangement
as revealed by the graphs of Figs. 2-14 to 2-30.
These nondimensional parameters are not only useful in allowing a compact
graphical presentation of exchanger performance but also possess a readily
grasped physical significance. The effectiveness e compares the actual heat
transfer rate, q = Ch(th.in- th.out) = Ce(te.out - te
•in) , to the thermodynamically
limited, maximum possible heat transfer rate as would be realized only in a
counterflow heat exchanger of infinite heat transfer area, namely,
qmax = Ce(th.in- te,in) if C, < Ch or Ch(th,in - te,in) if Ch< Ce. Thus e possesses the
significance of effectiveness of the heat exchanger from a thermodynamic point
of view.
Note that, given the operating conditions th,in , te,in' Ch
, and Ce
, the magnitude
of e completely defines the heat transfer performance. If Ch = Cmin , then e=
(th,in - th,out)/(th,in - te,in)' which is a "temperature effectiveness" for cooling the
hot fluid. But if C, = C min, then e = (te,out - te,in)/(th,in - te,in), which is the temper￾ature effectiveness for heating the cold fluid. However, the general definition of
effectiveness, Eq. (2-6), is not a temperature effectiveness, but rather a "heat
transfer effectiveness," and ambiguity will be avoided if this definition is strictly
adhered to,
The number of heat transfer units Ntu is a nondimensional expression of the
"heat transfer size" of the exchanger. Examination of Fig. 2-14, as an example,
demonstrates the asymptotic character of the e-Nturelation for a given capacity￾rate ratio. When the Ntu is small the exchanger effectiveness is low, and when the
Ntu is large, e approaches asymptotically the limit imposed by flow arrangement
and thermodynamic considerations. The manner in which the transfer area and
overall conductance enter into the Ntu expression, Eq. (2-7), emphasizes the
costs of attaining a large Ntu (and hence high effectiveness) in terms ofcapitaliza￾tion, space, and weight for transfer area A, or in terms of an increased flow-fric￾tion power requirement to obtain lower convective resistances for higher U,
From Eq. (2-2) for the case of negligible wall resistance, an interesting and
useful relationship between Ntu and the Stanton numbers for each of the fluid
streams can be derived.
1
(2-10)
where Cmin is the smaller of the two capacity rates Ch and Ce
•
The third nondimensional parameter, the capacity-rate ratio Cmin/Cmax, is
simply the ratio of mass flow rate times specific heat capacity for the two
streams. These products can be considered as flow stream thermal-capacity
rates, i.e., energy-storage rate in the stream per unit of temperature change.
flow arrangement flow arrangement flow arrangement
flow arrangement

18 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig.2-3 Fluidtemperature conditionsin a counterflowheatexchanger.
AREA
tho '" . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - i -T--
i I
: I
I lI O
i I
Ii
'-- ~::_L. t
e
. '"
The relationship implied in Eq, (2-9) is a key one in the presentation of
exchanger heat transfer performance, The argument leading to it follows. Con￾sider the presentation in Fig, 2-3 of the fluid temperature condition in a coun￾terflow heat exchanger, with Ch< cACh = Cmin ' C, = Cm.,.}. The heat transfer
rate equation (2-1) may be written in integrated form
(2-1a)
where t'i.tm is a suitably averaged mean temperature difference (th
- te
) . Two
additional expressions may be written for q, based on energy balance considera￾tions
q = Ch(th,in - th,out)
q = Ce(te,out - te,in)
(2-11)
(2-12)
(2-1h)
As previously noted, the maximum possible heat transfer rate is limited by flow
rates and inlet fluid temperatures to
qrnax = Crnin(th,in - te,in) = Ch.6.o
Normalizing Eqs. (2-1a), (2-11), and (2-12) with qrnax yields
VA .6.tm
e=-- c, .6.0
(2-12a)
(2-11a)
t - t e = h,in h,out
.6.0
e = tC,out -t·
e,m --£. C
.6.0 c,
The mean temperature difference .6.tm is some sort of a mean value between the
terminal magnitudes (th,in - te,out) and (th,out - te,in)' Moreover, the flow arrange￾ment should be expected to influence the averaging procedure. Now from Eqs.

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 19
(2-11a) and (2-12a),
Similarly,
Thus it is apparent that
~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C,
and, combining with Eq. (2-1h),
e= <I> (Nt u ,
Removing the restrictions specified in Fig. 2-1 of Ch < C; and a counterflow
arrangement suggests the validity ofEq. (2-9).
e-Nto Relations
e-Ntu relations described by Figs. 2-14 to 2-29 will now be considered.
Counterflou: (Fig. 2-14) See Appendix C for the derivation. The algebraic
relation is
1 - e-Neu(l-Cml./Cmu)
e= (2-13) 1 - (Cmin/Cmax)e N..(l CmJ.lCmu)
where Nt u = AU/Cminis always based on the minimum capacity rate. Calculated
results for the preparation of Fig. 2-14 are listed in Table 2-2. Note that for all
capacity-rate ratios the effectiveness approaches unity for large magnitudes of
Nt u • This is a direct consequence, of course, of the definition of e [see Eq. (2-6)
and accompanying text]. Note further that the smaller the capacity-rate ratio,
the higher the effectiveness for a given Nt u • Two limiting cases ofEq. (2-13) are
of particular interest for gas-turbine heat exchanger design, namely, Cmin /
Cmax = 0 and 1. The first case approximates the situation for a water-cooled
intercooler, where Cwater C air, and the second case is descriptive of a regenera￾tor, where C gos = Cairo For these conditions, Eq. (2-13) reduces to
for
and to
e = 1- e-N•u
Cm;n = 0
Cmax
»;
e=---
1 +Nt u
(2-13a)
(2-13h)
~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C,
~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C, ~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C, ~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C,
~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C,
~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C,
~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C,
~tm = <I> (e Ch
)
' C,

20 Compact Heat Exchangers
for Cmin = 1
Cm""
Note that for an evaporator or condenser, Cmin/Cm"" = 0, because if one fluid
remains at constant temperature throughout the exchanger, its specific heat, and
thus its capacity rate, is by definition equal to infinity.
Parallel Flow (Fig. 2.15) The equation for this relation is
e= (2-14)
1 + Cmin/Cm""
Computed results for the preparation ofFig. 2-15 are summarized in Table 2-3.
Note that, unlike the counterflow case, the asymptote for effectiveness is less
than unity except for Cmin/Cm"" = O. For CmiR/Cm"" = 1 the maximum possible
effectiveness in parallel flow is only 50 percent, or one-half that of counterflow.
For Cmin/Cm"" = 0, Eq. (2-14) reduces to
(2-14a)
which is identical to Eq. (2-13a) for counterflow. It is thus evident that, as far as
performance is concerned, a counterflow intercooler (Cwater Coor), evaporator,
or condenser possesses no advantage over a parallel-flow unit. However, for
Cmin/Cm"" = 1, Eq. (2-14) reduces to
e= (2-14b) 2
and it is seen from Fig. 2-28, where both Eqs. (2-13b) and (2-14b) are plotted,
that a parallel-flow gas-turbine-plant regenerator (Cgos = Coor) has substantially
lower performance for Ntu> 0.7 (e > 40 percent).
Cross./low, Both Fluids Unmixed (Fig. 2-16) In this type of crossflow heat
exchanger, each fluid stream is assumed to have been divided into a large
number ofseparate flow tubes for passage through the heat exchanger with no
cross mixing. The effectiveness is based on the mixed mean temperature of the
outlet fluids. The analytic solution for this arrangement cannot be expressed in
closed form.
Table 2-4 and Fig. 2-16 are based on a series solution by Mason [3]. As for all
previous flow arrangements, for CmiR/Cm"" = 0
e= 1 - e-N..
Note that all the curves of Fig. 2-16 approach e = 1 asymptotically, as was the
case for counterflow. However, for all CmiR/Cm"" > 0, the effectiveness for a
given Ntuis less than for counterflow, with the greatest difference occurring for
Cmin/Cm"" = 1 (see Fig. 2-28).
Cross./low,One Fluid Mixed, the Other Unmixed (Fig. 2-17) See Appendix C for
the derivation. This flow arrangement is described schematically in Fig. 2-17;
Cmin/Cm""

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 21
one fluid is considered to flow through separate tubes so that cross mixing is nil,
while the other fluid is perfectly cross-mixed. The e-Ntuequations are as follows:
For
where
For
where
Cmax = Cunmixed, Cmin = Cmixed:
e = 1 - e-rCmu/Cmln
Cmax = Cmixed, Cmin = Cunmixed:
e = Cmax (1 - e-PCm,./Cmu)
Cmin
r' = 1- e-N tu
(2-15)
(2-16)
Here, as before, Ntu= AU/Cmin •
Computed results from these equations are summarized in Table 2-5. For the
limiting case of Cmin/Cmax = 0, both Eqs. (2-15) and (2-16) reduce to
e = 1- e-Nlu
the same as for the counterflow and parallel-flow cases, emphasizing again that
flow arrangement is unimportant where one capacity rate is very much greater
than the other. Note also from Fig. 2-17 that, if the option is allowed, it is better
to mix the fluid with the minimum capacity rate in preference to the fluid with
the maximum capacity rate.
Crossflow, Both Fluids Mixed (Fig. 2-18) This is an uncommon flow arrange￾ment in which each fluid temperature is a function of only one spatial coordi￾nate. Such an arrangement can be obtained only by baffiing both fluids. One
reason this arrangement is of interest is that it is a case where it is possible to
obtain a decrease in effectiveness with increasing Ntu.
The solution can be presented in closed algebraic form
u;
e=-----:-:---::--:----,----,--:.:'--....,.,.----:-:-=---=---:--
Ntu/(l - e- Nlu) +(Cmin/Cmax)Ntu/(l - e-Nlu(Cml./CmU») - 1
Computed results from this equation are in Table 2-6.
(2-17)
(2-18)
Multipass Ocerall-Counterfioui Arrangements, Fluids Mixed between Passes
See Appendix C for the derivation. It is possible to obtain solutions for overall￾counterflow multipass configurations in rather simple algebraic form if it is
postulated that the fluids are "mixed" between passes and that the total Ntu is
equally distributed between passes of the same basic arrangement in an overall￾counterflow configuration
[(1 - epCmin/Cmax)/(l - ep)]n - 1
e =
[(1 - epCmln/Cmax)/(l - 8p))n- Cmin/Cmax
where n is the number of identical passes in the overall-counterflow arrange￾ment and ep
is the effectiveness of each pass, a function of Ntu/n and the basic

22 Compact Heat Exchangers
flow configuration of the pass. Note that the individual 'passes can be anyone of
the basic flow arrangements.
For the special case of Cmin/Cmax = 1,
nep
e = (2-18a)
1 + (n - l)ep
The method used in deriving Eq. (2-18) is illustrated in Appendix C. It may be
described as one of synthesis, in that the overall effectiveness of the complex
system is related to the component effectiveness of each pass. An operating￾Iuie-sequihbrium-ltne technique, similar to that frequently used in the analysis of
mass transfer systems, can be employed very effectively to show the algebraic
relations in terms of simple geometrical relations. This is illustrated in Fig. 2-4
for Cmin/Cmax = 1, ep = 0.30, and n = 3; e = 0.562 from Eq. (2-18a).
Fig.2-4 Operating-line and eqUilibrium-line representation for Cc/Ch = 1, n = 3,
ep
= 0.30.
Epass = 0/ A
f=Oo/"t:. o
t h , In
EQUILIBRIUM LINE
/ "'" (slope = unily)
o l-...... '-/-"II"tf "vOVERALL OPERATING
o (slope c, C,/Ch )
'" "1- ·:
LINE
Multipass Ooerall-Counterfiou: Heat Exchangers with "Unmixed" Crossflow
Passes Figure 2-19 was prepared from Eq. (2-18a) assuming "unmixed" cross￾flow passes, for which ep
is given in Fig. 2-16. Since Eq. (2-18a) was employed, it
is assumed that there is complete mixing between passes. In contrast, Fig. 2-20,
from the results presented by Stevens et aI. [4], is based on one fluid mixed
between passes and the other fluid unmixed. Figure 2-21, based on the same
reference, shows the performance of an overall-counterflow arrangement with
crossflow passes where there is no mixing either within passes or between
passes. The difference between these three sets of curves is not great, and
thus the stipulation of mixing between passes, as in Eq. (2-18), is not highly
restricting.
Figures 2-19, 2-20, and 2-21 demonstrate that a close approach to counter-

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure- Drop Design 23
flow behavior can be realized by multi passing and that a large number of passes
are often not warranted.
Counterflow with Crossflow Headers (Fig. 2-22) A difficulty arises in building a
counterflow heat exchanger, using very compact plate-fin heat transfer surfaces,
in the separation of the two fluids at the ends ofthe heat exchanger. Some kind of
crossflow sandwich header must be used, and the usual procedure is to extend
the plates to form one or another of the two patterns shown in Fig. 2-22. Then
the fins in the end sections are brazed in such a manner as to turn the flow and
separate the fluids as in a cross flow heat exchanger.
The result is a composite heat exchanger with a true counterflow central core,
but with crossflow headers. One can anticipate that the performance, based on
the total heat transfer surface area, would be inferior to that of a simple
counterflow arrangement but superior to a simple crossflow arrangement. Fre￾quently in gas-flow applications the flow frontal area must be so large that a
substantial portion of the total heat transfer surface area (large portion of the
total NtJ is in the crossflow header section, and it is thus desirable to have a
reasonably accurate solution for such a composite heat exchanger.
A numerical solution for this flow arrangement is provided by Kays et al. [5].
General behavior is pictured in Fig. 2-22, and Table 2-7 summarizes their
results in more detail.
Parallel-Counterflow, Shell Fluid Mixed (Fig. 2-23) This basic flow arrange￾ment is described schematically in Fig. 2-23. It is one of the most common
arrangements for shell-and-tube construction. The algebraic relation, from
Wright [6] and Bowman et al. [7], is
2
e =
[1 + (Cmin/Cmax)] + ,)1 + (Cmin/Cmax)2(1 +e f)/(1 - e f)
where, in this case
(2-19)
r = n; 1+ (Cmin)2
Cmax
As for all the previous flow arrangements, this equation will reduce to Eq.
(2-13a) for the case of Cmin/Cmax = O. Calculated results for the preparation of
Fig. 2-23 are listed in Table 2-8. Note from this table and from Fig. 2-23 that for
Cmin/Cmax> 0, the effectiveness for an infinite area (Ntu= (0) is always less than
unity.
Equation (2-19) was derived for one shell pass and two tube passes. However,
four, six, eight, etc. tube passes yield results which are numerically so close to
the two-tube-pass situation that nothing is to be gained by presenting these more
complex expressions.
Multipass Overall-Counterflow Heat Exchangers with Parallel-Counterflow
Passes Figures 2-24, 2-25, and 2-26 show the effect of multipassing the basic

24 Compact Heat Exchangers
parallel-counterflow arrangement. These are some of the more popular arrange￾ments where shell-and-tube construction is employed. The results are based
entirely on Eq. (2-18), using the effectiveness of each pass, ep
, as evaluated from
Eq. (2-19).
Split-Flow Heat Exchangers (Fig. 2-27) This rather uncommon flow arrange￾ment is described schematically in Fig. 2-27. The e-Ntu characteristics were
obtained from the work of Iqbal and Stachiewiez [8].The solution is presented in
closed form in this paper. However, it is too complex algebraically to be pre￾sented here. The tabulations in Tables 2-9a and b were obtained from the
computer program results of Iqbal and Stachiewiez.
Like the crossflow both-fluids-mixed arrangement of Fig. 2-18, it is possible
to obtain a decrease in effectiveness with an increasing Ntu. There is a small
difference in performance between the situations Cshell = Cmin and Ctube = Cm1n.
The difference is negligible for Ntu< 5 but becomes more significant in the
higher Ntu range where an increase in Ntu results in lower effectiveness.
Effect of Flow Arrangement As has been pointed out, all flow arrangements
have the same e-Ntu relationship for Cmin/Cmax = 0, and for all other magnitudes
of Cmln/Cmax the effectiveness for counterflow is highest. The maximum differ￾ence in performance is for the case of Cmln/Cmax = 1. To illustrate this difference,
Figs. 2-28 and 2-29 were prepared. A study of these graphs will provide an idea
of relative area requirements for heat exchangers of different flow arrangements
and, in conjunction with Fig. 2-19, leads to the conclusion that, for effectiveness
of the order of 80 percent, pure counterflow or multipass counterflow arrange￾ments must be employed for Cmln/Cmax = 1 direct-transfer-type exchangers.
Effect ofCmin/ Cma•< 1for a Regenerator (Fig. 2-30) Most gas-turbine regener￾ators operate in the region Cmln/Cmax = 0.90 to 0.97 because of the influence of
the combustion products on both the specific heat and gas-flow rate. For design
purposes, it is convenient to use the simpler e-Nturelations for Cmln/Cmax = 1 and
make an approximate adjustment for the departure of this magnitude from
unity. Figure 2-30 was prepared for this purpose. As cross-counterflow arrange￾ments (with unmixed passes) will fall between the extremes of counterflow on
the one hand and single-pass crossflow on the other, interpolation may be used,
Log-Mean Rate Equation Compared to
e-Ntu Approach
A relation commonly used in heat exchanger design is a log-mean rate equation
of the form [9]
q = UAFc
where q is the overall heat transfer rate (in Btu per hour or watts) for the
exchanger, and isthe log-mean temperature difference of the two fluids
calculated as for the case of true counterflow. If the exchanger is actually a

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 25
counterflow unit, the nondimensional factor Fe is unity. For all other flow
arrangements, Fe is less than unity. This factor has been calculated for a variety
of flow configurations and is presented in graphical form by Bowman et a1. [7].
Figure 2-5 indicates the parameters employed. The purpose of the following
text is first to demonstrate the one-to-one correspondence between the log￾mean rate equation and the e-Ntu approach, and second, to present some argu￾ments in favor of the latter method.
Fig. 2-5 Flow configuration correction factors for log-mean rate equation
(not to scale). Flow arrangement specified.
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Suppose one considers two exchangers, a reference counterflow exchanger
and the exchanger in question. Each is to operate with the same U, inlet fluid
temperatures, and flow rates, and the area of the reference exchanger is to be
proportioned so that it has the same q. It then follows that .Mlog.mean will be the
same for the two exchangers and
Fe = Acounterflow <: 1
A
or
Fe = Ntu(counterflow for the same e)
Ntu(actual)
Examination of X and Z leads to the conclusions that
or
and
X=e
X =e (~:)
Z
c, . h Gmin 1
= C = eit erC or G . IG
h max mm max
X=e X=e
X=eX=e
X=eX=e
X=eX=e

26 Compact Heat Exchangers
It is clear, then, that a one-to-one correspondence exists between the two sets of
parameters.
The arguments in favor of the e-Ntu approach follow:
1. The effectiveness is a simply defined, overall performance parameter
having thermodynamic significance like an efficiency factor; it should
therefore stand alone as a dependent variable and not appear directly in
the abscissa and indirectly in the ordinate.
2. The log-mean rate equation misleadingly simplifies the notion of what is
involved in heat exchanger design theory, since the implication isthat only
a rate equation is required. In reality, ofcourse, both the rate equation and
energy-balance principles are involved, but the latter is hidden in the Fe
factor.
3. The e-Ntu approach simplifies the algebra involved in predicting the per￾formance of complex flow arrangements.
4. The more cogent arguments are related to ease of use in design work. To
illustrate, consider the following two typical problems:
a. Given U, Cp Ch
, and the terminal temperatures, to determine the
necessary A.
b. Given A, U, Cc
, Ch
, and th
•
in and tc
•
in , to determine outlet temperatures.
A detailed comparison of the steps for both problems is made in Table 2-1.
For the first problem, both approaches give a straightforward solution. How￾ever, the e-Ntu approach avoids the tedium involved in evaluating i1tlog-mean' The
e-Ntu approach offers even greater advantages for the second problem, as can be
seen from the table; the e-Ntu approach is straightforward, whereas the log-mean
!it approach involves successive approximations.
Table 2-1 Comparison of e-Ntu and Log-Mean M Approaches
e-N,uApproach
Problem (a)
Log-mean lit Approach
I. Calculate e from the given terminal temper￾atures. Also calculate Cmin/Cmox'
2. Use the e-N,ucurve for the particular flow
arrangements and Cmin/Cmox to evaluate
Nt u •
3. Calculate A from
A=N Cmin
'u U
1. Calculate X and Z from the given terminal
temperatures.
2. Use the FG(X, Z) curve for the particular
flow arrangement to get FG'
3. Calculate lit'og_mran from the terminal tem￾peratures.
4. Calculate A from
A = q
VFClitlog_mean
where q is evaluated from the terminal tem￾peratures and the appropriate capacity rate.

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 27
Table 2-1 Comparison of e-Ntu and Log-Mean M Approaches (continued)
Problem (b)
I. Calculate Ntu from the given information.
Also calculate Cm;n/Cm.. '
2. Use the e-Ntu curve for the particular flow
arrangement and Cm;n/Cm.. to evaluate e.
3. Calculate q from
I. Calculate Z from Z = CJC•.
2. Assume terminal temperature so as to evalu￾ate Xhtapprox'
3. Get FG,hupprox from curve.
4. Evaluate
t1tlog-mean,lftapprox
and terminal temperatures from
(I,.oul- 1'.in)C, = q
(I'.;n - 1•.0ut)C. = q
5. Determine qhtapprox from the log-mean rate
equation.
6. Calculate terminal temperature to compare
with the assumptions of step 2.
7. Repeat until satisfactory agreement is ob￾tained.
HEAT TRANSFER IN LIQUID-COUPLED INDIRECT￾TYPE EXCHANGERS
The liquid-coupled indirect-transfer-type exchanger system is pictured in Fig.
2-6. This system consists of two direct-type exchangers coupled together by the
circulation of a satisfactory heat transfer medium, such as water or a liquid metal.
The principal advantages are (1) since the hot-fluid flow area is not coupled
directly with the cold-fluid flow area, a less awkward heat exchanger shape may
result, particularly if there is as much as a 6: 1 disparity in flow densities, as in
the gas-turbine-regenerator application. (2) If the hot and cold fluids are gases,
the liquid coupling will, in general, allow for a better and more compact
machinery arrangement because of the simpler gas-ducting situation.
Fig. 2-6 Liquid-coupled indirect-transfer type of heat exchanger.
C h
(for hot fluid)
ULATlNG PUMP
CL
(for coupl ing
liquid)
Cc
(for cold fluid)
~- ----- ....... .....
HOT -SIDE
EXCHANGER
tLl
G::
CIRC
COLD-SIDE
t
c 2 EXCHANGER to!

28 Compact Heat Exchangers
The disadvantages are (1) greater total transfer area requirement, of the
order of 10 to 20 percent for the gas-turbine regenerator; (2) additional compli￾cations of the coupling-liquid circuit; (3) the lack of a universally satisfactory
heat transfer medium.
e-Ntu Relations
The theory of the liquid-coupled indirect-transfer-type exchanger is developed
by London and Kays [10]. It is based on a synthesized solution employing an
operating-line - equilibrium-line representation, using for the cold-side unit (tL
,
tJ coordinates, for the hot-side unit (th
, tL
) coordinates, and for the overall
performance (th
, te) coordinates, all on the same plane. The results follow:
For CL > c,» c.,
(2-20a)
(2-20b)
(2-20c)
(2-20d)
(2-20e)
(2-20f)
In these relations e is the overall effectiveness for transfer from the hot to the
cold fluids, and e; and eh are the component effectiveness of the cold-side and
hot-side direct-transfer exchangers.
For the special case of Ch = C; = C, as approximated in the gas-turbine￾regenerator application, the applicable foregoing equations reduce to two.
For c, = c,= C> CL
,
(2-2Ia)
For CL > c,» c.,
For CL > c,» c.,
For CL > c,» c.,
For CL > c,» c.,
For CL > c,» c.,
For CL > c,» c.,
For CL > c,» c.,
For CL > c,» c.,
For C For CL > c,» c., L > c,» c.,
For CL >For c,»C c., L > c,» c.,
For CL > c,»Forc., CL > c,» c.,
For C > c,»

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 29
(2-21b)
If the further specification is made that the coupling-liquid capacity rate
CL = C, = Ch = C, the resulting equation is
1
e = l/e
c
+ l/eh _ 1 (2-22)
It is important to note that in Eqs. (2-20a) to (2-22), the overall and component
effectiveness are defined, as throughout this chapter, by the temperature
change for the fluid having the minimum capacity rate. Thus, for example, if
CL > c,> Co
Optimum Conditions of Operation
The foregoing relationships can be used to provide design criteria for optimizing
the coupling-liquid flow rate and the heat-transfer-area distribution between
the hot-side and cold-side units [10]. For the case of Ch = C, = C, the following
criteria result:
1. The coupling liquid CL
should be kept within the fairly narrow range
0.95 < CL/C < 1.20, with unity being the optimum.
2. The heat-transfer-area distribution should be kept within the rather broad
range
0.75
Uc/Uh Ah Uc/Uh
If the cold-side area is less expensive than the hot-side area, it would pay to
unbalance the design to the right. If the machinery arrangement is such as to
make it desirable to reduce the cold-side volume, the design may be unbalanced
toward the left with no significant loss in performance.
HEAT TRANSFER IN PERIODIC-FLOW-TYPE
EXCHANGERS
The two types of periodic-flow exchangers are the rotary and valved types, as
described in Fig. 2-7. In the rotary type, the rotation of the porous matrix
provides a flow of the solid phase from hot-side to cold-side streams in a regular,
1
e = l/e
c
+ l/eh _ 1
1
e = l/e
c
+ l/eh _ 1
1
e = l/e
c
+ l/eh _ 1
1
e = l/e
c
+ l/eh _ 1
1
e = l/e
c
+ l/eh _ 1
1
e = l/e
c
+ l/eh _ 1
CL > c,C>L >Coc,> Co

30 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 2-7 Periodic-flow exchanger types.
ROTARY TYPE
AXIAL FLOW RADIAL FLOW
l-.-....J
~ ...........~4-~ HOT FLUID
r----l MA TRIX
VALVED TYPE
HOT FLUID
----,------------,
MATRIX
'- $1 __
~-----~---_--_-J
HOT FLUID
COLD FLUID
VALVE tOPEN
I
I
$ CLOSED
I
I
COLD FLUID
periodic manner. Thus the matrix is alternately heated and cooled, and in this
manner heat is transferred indirectly from the hot to the cold fluids. The
relationship of the periodic-flow type to the previously considered liquid-cou￾pled indirect-transfer type is evident.
The valved type of exchanger has two identical matrices, each one function￾ing alternately as either a hot-flow or a cold-flow matrix by means of a periodic
switching of the quick operating valves. In this exchanger, the mass of the two
matrices divided by the period of valve operations correspondsto the mass ofthe
single matrix in the rotary type times the speed of rotation. The heat exchanger
design theory will apply equally to both types, once this correspondence on the
matrix mass rate is recognized.
There are three major advantages of the periodic-flow heat exchanger rela￾tive to the direct-transfer type
1. A much more compact heat transfer surface can be employed. For exam￾ple, a 24-mesh screen matrix has an area density of the order of 1,000
ft2/ft3
(3,300 m2/m3
) .

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 31
2. The heat transfer surface in general is substantially less expensive per unit
of transfer area.
3. Because of the periodic flow reversals, there are no permanent flow-stag￾nation regions and, consequently, the surface tends to be self-cleaning.
The self-cleaning feature has been well demonstrated by Ljungstrom-type
air preheaters used in central station plants employing the very lowest
grades of coals.
The major disadvantages are
1. There is some mixing of the hot and cold fluids because of leakage and
carryover.
2. If the fluids are at different pressures, as in the gas-turbine regenerator,
the sealing problem is a difficult one for the rotary type.
e-Ntu Relations
The theory for this type of exchanger is summarized by Coppage and London
[11]. Because of mathematical difficulties, computer solutions are required.
Lambertson [12] and Bahnke and Howard [13] provide the most comprehensive
results. Figures 2-31 to 2-38 and Tables 2-10 to 2-15 were compiled from these
sources.
The nondimensional parameters used in these presentations parallel those
used heretofore, with some additions and modifications as follows:
d> ( Cmin Cr )
e = 'V Ntu.o , C'
max mm
(2-23)
Here the modified number of transfer units is by definition
N
tu
.
o = [(I/M)c1(l/hA)J
Alternatively, to gain the same form as Eq. (2-10) and its relation to the thermal
circuit of Fig. 2-2,
1 1 + 1
Ntu.o (Ch/Cmin)Ntu.h «uc.s«:
The matrix capacity rate is the matrix mass rate times the specific heat of the
solid. For the rotary type,
CrIBtu/(h· OF) or W/K] = (rev/h)(matrix mass)(csolid)
For the valved type, the mass of both the identical matrices would be used
together with the valve cycles per hour (with the period being the interval
"valve on to off to on"). Note that the modified number of transfer units Ntu.o
parallels that for the direct-transfer-type exchanger where, for the case of
negligible wall resistance and all prime surface (1'/0 = 1), Eq. (2-2) yields
+ 1
«uc.s«:
+ 1
«uc.s«:

For Cmin/Cmax
For Cr/Cmin
For Ntu.o
32 Compact Heat Exchangers
The range covered in the e-Ntu.ographs (Figs. 2-31 to 2-38) and tables (Tables
2-9 to 2-14) are as follows:
1.0,0.95,0.90,0.80,0.70,0.50
1 to 00
oto 100 for some tables
oto lOon most graphs
The higher Ntu.o
ranges are ofinterest in cryogenic heat exchanger applications.
However, because of the asymptotic approach of effectiveness toward unity on
the usual e-Ntu.o graph (Figs. 2-31 to 2-36), it is more revealing to graph (1 - e)
versus Ntu,o on log-log coordinates, as in Fig. 2-37 for Cmin/Cmax = 1 and Fig. 2-38
for Cmin/Cmax = 0.95.
In addition to the nondimensional parameters noted in Eq. (2-23), the ratio of
conductances
(hAt = hA on the Cmin side
hA on the Cmax side
enters into the analysis. The e-Ntu,o curves in Figs. 2-31 to 2-38 are all based on
(hA)O = 1. However, it is revealed by computer calculations [12, 13] that the
influence of this parameter is quite negligible for the ranges of (hAt shown on
the graphs in Figs. 2-31 to 2-36. The largest error is two points on e, which
occurs on the Cmin/Cmax = 0.50 graph (Fig. 2-36) at Cr/Cmin= 1.0. This error
magnitude is halved for Cr/Cmin= 1.5. For the Cmin/Cmax = 1 graph (Fig. 2-31),
the maximum error, again at Cr/Cmin= 1.0, is only ofthe order of0.2 points on e.
Influence of Matrix Speed
A simple empirical formulation for the influence of Cr/Cmin, for e <: 90 percent,
is
e = [1 - 9(C . )1.93]
directtype r mm
(2-24)
The right-hand bracket accounts for the matrix speed. The counterflow direct￾transfer exchanger effectiveness is a function only of Ntu,o and Cmin/Cmax; it may
be determined either from Eq. (2-13) or Fig. 2-14. For higher values of effec￾tiveness (e> 90 percent), an ineffectiveness graph, (1 - e) versus Ntu.o (Figs.
2-37 and 2-38), is recommended in place ofEq. (2-24).
Matrix speed is significant not only because ofthe direct influence of C; or e,
as indicated by Eq. (2-24), but also because of a carryover loss associated with
the void volume of the matrix. For minimum carryover, it would be desirable to
operate at low rotative speed, but this results in a lower e. Another advantage of
low-speed operation is the reduction ofseal wear if rubbing seals are employed.
After a preliminary matrix design is accomplished, Eq. (2-24) can be em￾ployed to investigate the influence of operation at off-design speeds. Figure 2-8
indicates such an extrapolation. It is evident that the design rotative speed was

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 33
Fig. 2-8 Influence of rotativespeed on performance of periodic-flow exchanger.
20 30 40
RPM
10
DESIGN
POINT
d
/""
'<.Y
/
I
I
0.7
0.6
o
1.0
e 0.8
0.9
much higher than necessary and that a reduction of speed from 31 r/min
(corresponding to CrlCe= 10.8) to 15 r/min could be made.
Matrix speed has a substantial influence on the periodic fluctuation of the
matrix temperature. This subject is covered by Mondt (14). It may be shown by
elementary considerations that the average matrix double amplitude is given by
e
t5tm.av = C IC . (th•in- te.in)
r mID
Rotating Seals and Switch Valving
A very important aspect of the mechanical design of a periodic-flow heat
exchanger is the provision for obtaining flow periodicity with minimum leakage.
The subject is beyond the scope of this monograph. Design problems with
respect to rotating seals are discussed by Hryniszak (15), and the fluid mechanics
of clearance seals are covered by Harper (16).
EFFECT OF LONGITUDINAL CONDUCTION IN
HEAT EXCHANGERS
The exchanger theory presented to this point is all based on the idealization that
there is no longitudinal conduction (in the flow direction), either in the solid wall
or in the fluid. Fluids generally have a low thermal conductivity (liquid metals
excepted), but the wall conductivity may be quite high. Consequently, only
wall-conduction effects will be considered in the following treatment. The
influence of longitudinal conduction is to reduce exchanger effectiveness for a
given number of transfer units, and this reduction may be quite serious in
exchangers with short flow lengths designed for high effectiveness (e> 90
percent).
The following simplified analysis yields a rough approximation of the influ￾ence of longitudinal conduction. Consider the temperature conditions pictured
in Fig. 2-9 for a direct-transfer-type exchanger with Cmin/Cmax. = 1. The temper-

34 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 2-9 Temperature distribution in a counterflow heat exchanger with
Cc = Ch ·
t c. out - -
I-------L .. ,
I
--------t::--------rT
I Ot
i I
: I
: t Wall
__.-t
c. In
AREA
ature difference Ot shown for the hot fluid is of the same magnitude for the cold
fluid and also for the wall. Then the wall temperature gradient is Ot/L, with L
being the flow length. Ifthe wall cross-sectional area for longitudinal conduction
is designated Ak
, the longitudinal heat transfer by conduction is of the order
Ot
qk= kAk L
In contrast, the convection heat transfer rate is given by energy-balance consid￾erations as .
and then
qk = (k/L)Ak
q C
Now, if qktends to reduce the actual transfer q, qk/q is ofthe order &/8, where &
is the decrement in effectiveness; thus
& = (k/L)Ak = A.
8 Croin
(2-25)
where A., the nondimensional conduction parameter, is defined as shown. This
simply determined result provides an approximation of the actual effect of
longitudinal conduction. When a more complete analysis is attempted, the
solutions are sufficiently complex to require computer calculation. Fortunately,
the comprehensive results of Bahnke and Howard (13) are available, and Figs.
2-39 and 2-40 were prepared from this reference. In these graphs, exchanger

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 35
ineffectiveness (1 - e)is presented as a function ofNtu (or Ntu 0) and A. for the two
magnitudes of Cmin/Cmax, 1.0 and 0.95, which are of primary interest in the
gas-turbine-regenerator application. While the original paper [13] was con￾cerned only with the periodic-flow-type regenerator, the periodic-flow and
direct-transfer types have identical behavior for Cr/Cmin= 00. Moreover, it is
shown that it is only necessary to have Cr/Cmin> 5 for the periodic-flow behavior
to very closely approach the Cr/Cmin= 00, or direct-transfer-type, behavior. This
result is suggested by the previous curves, Figs. 2-31 to 2-36, which show very
little difference between Cr/Cmin= 5 and 00. Note that, as in the case of Figs.
2-37 and 2-38, the ineffectiveness (1 - e)is a more useful dependent parameter
than the effectiveness edirectly, particularly for e> 90 percent. The logarithmic
coordinates are useful in properly emphasizing the importance of the longitu￾dinal conduction effect. For instance, it is readily apparent from Figs. 2-39 and
2-40 that if the desired e = 98.5 percent
»: % increase c.u«;
For,l. = 0 For,l.= 0.01 ofN,u
1.00 66 190 188
0.95 29.5 40 36
The rather striking percent of increase in Ntu can be readily scaled from the
graph.
This illustration also serves to emphasize the strong influence of Cmin/Cmax for
high-e heat exchangers. Here only a 5 percent increase in the capacity-rate ratio
from 0.95 to 1.00 results in approximately a 124 percent and a 375 percent
increase in the required number of transfer units for A= 0 and 0.01, respec￾tively.
CORE PRESSURE DROP
In the design of liquid-to-liquid heat exchangers, accurate knowledge of the
friction characteristics of the heat transfer surface is relatively unimportant
because of the low power requirement for pumping high-density fluids. For
gases, however, because of their lower density, the friction power per unit mass
flow rate is greatly multiplied. Thus, to the designer, the friction characteristic
of the surface assumes an importance equal to that of the heat transfer character￾istic. The friction characteristic needed is the flow-friction factor f, which is
reported in Chaps. 6, 7, and 10 as a function offlow geometry and the Reynolds
number.
The Pressure-Drop Equation
Figure 2-10 shows the flow system to be considered. For gas-flow heat ex￾changer applications, the pressure changes from sections 1 to a and from b to 2
are very small relative to the total pressure; thus Va = VI and Vb = V2·

36 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 2-10 Heat exchanger core model for pressure-drop analysis. G is based on
the minimum free-flow area in the core.
I I
a b
2
I
I
2
I
I
--r￾I
I
a b
I I
F}:s:sssssssssb
I
T
I
FLOW!
I
I
I
Then, by definition of the entrance and exit loss coefficients K; and K. [Eqs.
(5-1) and (5-2)], and by an integration of the momentum equation through the
core, the relation for the flow-stream pressure-drop calculation for most heat
exchanger cores is
ti.P = G2 VI
PI 2ge PI VI Ae VI
entrance How core
effect acceleration friction
-(1 - (12 - K.) V
2]
exit VI
effect
(2-26a)t
However, for flow normal to tube banks or through wire matrix surfaces, as
might be employed in periodic-flow-type exchangers, entrance and exit loss
effects are accounted for in the friction factor, and the equation becomes (with
K; and K. = 0),
ti.P= G2 VI [(1 + (12) (V2 -1) + vmJ
PI se: PI VI Ae VI
flow core
acceleration friction
(2-26b)
The porosity p replaces (1 for matrix surfaces.
For multipass arrangements, losses in the return headers must be accounted
for separately, as must any losses in inlet and exit headers and associated ducting.
It is worth noting that A/Ae = L/rh, by definition of the hydraulic radius, Eq.
t gc' the proportionality factor in Newton's second law, is equal to 32.2 (lbm/lbf)ft/s
2
in
English units and equal to unity (dimensionless) in 51 units.

(2-27)
Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 37
(1-4); further
G2 VI _ (Vf/2gJ _ dynamic head
2gc PI - (PI/PI) - static head
where VI = G/PI is the flow velocity entering the core, based on the minimum
free-flow area, which defines G.
The correct mean specific volume to be used in Eqs. (2-26a and b) is
V =-
1 fA v dA mAo
Consider the flow temperature conditions pictured in Figs. 2-9 and 2-11. For a
magnitude of unity for Cmln/Cmax (Fig. 2-9), flow-stream temperatures vary
Fig. 2-11 Temperature distribution in a heat exchanger
of any flow arrangement with C, Ch
.
-----1 h, In
t h• OUI
AREA
linearly with area in a true counterflow arrangement, and also to a good approxi￾mation for any flow arrangement other than parallel flow. Consequently,
or
(2-27a)
(2-27b)
where Tay and Pay are arithmetic averages of the terminal magnitudes. In con￾trast, if the wall temperature is essentially uniform (Fig. 2-11), as in the water￾cooled intercooler, the condenser, or the evaporator, Eq. (2-27) reduces to
V m PI Tlma
-=---
VI Pay TI
V m PI Tlma
-=---
VI Pay TI
V m PI Tlma
-=---
VI Pay TI

38 Compact Heat Exchangers
where Pay isthe arithmetic average ofthe terminal magnitudes and rIma isrelated
to the log-mean temperature difference between the fluid with the changing
temperature and the constant fluid temperature I:1t1ma by
(2-28)
(2-29)
Here, for the conditions shown in the figure, the plus sign is used and
At _ (th,;n - tJ - (th,out - te) _ th,;n - th,out
U lma - -
In [(th,in - te)/(th,out - te)] N tu
A similar expression with t
e
in place of th would be used if th were essentially
constant and t
e varied (Ch Ce) with the minus sign used in Eq. (2-28),
The mass velocity G in Eq. (2-26a) is based on the minimum free-flow area,
consistent with the definition of friction factor employed here.
Entrance and exit effects in Eq. (2-26a) normally provide only a small contri￾bution to the overall pressure drop in the usual exchanger design because, since
A/Aeis quite large, the core-friction term controls the magnitude of I:1P. Conse￾quently, high accuracy in the evaluation ofK; and K;is not required. Chapter 5
(Figs. 5-2 to 5-5) reports magnitudes of the entrance and exit loss coefficients as
functions of flow geometry and Reynolds number.
The friction factorf, as used in Eq. (2-26a), is affected by the variation offluid
properties P and f.l over the flow cross section, as well as variations in the flow
direction. Chapter 4 deals with this problem and provides the correctfto use in
the pressure-drop equations.
The Core-Velocity Equation
Equations (2-26a and b) provide means for evaluating pressure drop given the
core velocity and geometry; however, there is no direct relationship of the
pressure drop to heat transfer performance in these equations. The usual design
problem provides a specification of both pressure drop and heat transfer per￾formance, and it is useful to evaluate a first approximation for the core velocity in
order to obtain a preliminary size for the core. An approximate equation for this
purpose is
Vf!2ge (I:1P/P) Pm St
PI/PI = Ntu one side PI f 110 (2-30a)
Here, presumably, the designer is in a position to specify the allowable pressure
drop (I:1P/P) on each side and the necessary Ntu.oneside defined by
Ntu,oneside = (110 St)
rh one side
which is related to the overall number of heat transfer units by Eq. (2-10). The
necessary magnitude can be estimated by working backward from the given e to
the necessary overall Ntu , estimating or specifying a desirable distribution of
heat transfer resistances, hot and cold sides, and then using Eq. (2-10) to
approximate the Ntu , on each side, as defined above. The ratio St/fcontains the

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 39
core-surface characteristics for a given fluid. Figure 2-41 is a presentation of this
characteristic as a function of the Reynolds number for several rather different
surface geometries.t The important points to note at this time are that (1) there
isrelatively small variation in Stlffor, say, a twofold range ofRe; (2) there is only
about a sixfold range St/ffor markedly different surfaces; and (3) the scale of the
surface is of minor importance and enters primarily via the Reynolds number.
Thus one can readily estimate a magnitude of St/fto use in Eq. (2-30) for the
purpose of calculating the core flow velocity. Moreover, from the first approxi￾mation flow velocity the Re can be evaluated for a better second approximation
of St/ffor an iterative calculation for VI'
Since the velocity varies as the square root of St/f, the sixfold extreme range
of this characteristic means that there can be only a 2t-fold range of velocities
possible (based on free-flow area) by surface-type selection alone. Only a very
small change in VI is possible by using finer or grosser surfaces of a particular
type. Further, a graph such as Fig. 2-41 allows ready selection of surface types
which will produce small flow frontal areas, if this is a design requirement.
Equation (2-30) is readily derived from Eq. (2-26) by neglecting the entrance
and exit effects along with the flow-acceleration pressure-drop term. Thus the
VI calculated from Eq. (2-30) tends to be slightly on the high side.
SURFACE SELECTION METHODOLOGY
In the schematic representation of the methodology of heat exchanger design,
Fig. 2-1, surface characteristics are pictured as a key input to the design theory
procedure. Figure 2-12 is an elaboration of Fig. 2-1, with two steps replacing
the single surface characteristic, namely, surface selection (two or more cases)
and surface characteristics including heat transfer, flow friction, and geometrical
characteristics of the surface selected. The following treatment deals briefly
with a methodology the designer may use in selecting surfaces for a case-by-case
exchanger design study leading to the optional solutions indicated in Fig. 2-12.
As previously mentioned in the discussion of Eq. (2-30a), graphs of St/f
versus Re or StPr2
/
3
If versus Re, as in Fig. 2-41, provide a means of selecting a
surface geometry which results in an exchanger of smaller flow area. To empha￾size this point, consider the following reformulation of Eq. (2-30a), using the
mass velocity G as a replacement for VI'
(2-30b)
It is evident that the surface with the higher St/fwill have the smaller flow area
Ac
• Thus a surface flow area "goodness factor" method of selection is provided
by a graph such as Fig. 2-41. Recall, however, that the frontal-area to flow-area
ratio, 1/0', is involved in the translation of Ac
to the core frontal area.
t Figure 2-41 employsan ordinate (St/Pr 2/3 )/f To convert to St/f, asdesired for Eq. (2-30),
multiply by 1.27 for gaseousfluids with Pr = 0.70.
G as a replacement
G as a replacement G as a G as a replacement
G as a replacement

40 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig.2-12 Methodology of heat exchanger design and optimization.
HEAT
EXCHANGER
ANALYSIS
PROCEDURE
& OPTIMIZATION
------------\
MECHANICAL
DESIGN
INCLUDING
HEADERS
AND THERMAL
STRESSES
...,,/
OPTIMUM
SOLUTION FOR
THE CASES
CONSIDERED

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 41
Acompanion goodness factor will now be considered, namely, a heat transfer
surface area (or a core volume or a core mass) goodness factor. Equations (1-1)
and (1-2) and Fig. 1-2 will suffice for this consideration. A surface geometry
selection that falls high on a graph of h versus E (for a given set of fluid properties
Cp
, u, Pr, p, and a specified hydraulic diameter 4rh) will have the smallest heat
transfer area requirement. Similarly, a graph of hP versus Ep will provide a
selection method for surface geometries which will yield small volume and,
usually, small mass cores.
FLOW DISTRIBUTION AND HEADER DESIGNt
One disadvantage in the use of highly compact surface geometries is that the
resulting core shapes are characterized by large flow frontal area and short flow
lengths for the gas-flow path. The common automobile radiator is a close-at￾hand example - a frontal area of approximately 3.3 ft2
(0.31 m2
) and an air flow
length of 1.2 in (0.0305 m) for a 220 hp (164 kW) automobile engine! In this
application, the large frontal area can be accommodated by a front mounting on
the vehicle. However, heat exchangers in other installations must be located in
ducting, and the flow headed configurations have a definitive influence on the
engine system envelope geometry.
Figure 2-42a describes a folded-core concept used to reduce header volume.
However, if the pressure drop across the core is not uniform, as is the case for the
Fig. 2-42a configuration, the flow distribution over the heat transfer surfaces
will not be uniform, and a penalty in heat exchanger performance is the result.
From this viewpoint, the design objective is to provide for acceptably uniform
flow through the core with an acceptable header geometry and now-stream
mechanical energy losses. Uniformity of flow distribution over the core face is
the dominating function of the headers. The importance of header design is
emphasized in the schematic representation of the methodology of heat ex￾changer design (Fig. 2-12), where it is listed in the mechanical design box. A
poor header configuration may actually result in a lower overall pressure drop,
but the penalty in heat transfer performance can be very large.
London et al. [17] considered three header configurations, as shown in Fig.
2-42b to d. They provided the theory needed to specify the exit and inlet header
shapes and sizes which yield the desired uniformity of the pressure drop,
~p matrtx s over the core. Experimental results support the predictions quite well
(±5 percent nonuniformity).
As illustrated in the numerical example of Ref. 17, the parallel-flow configu￾ration has a header pressure loss (total-to-total), exclusive of core pressure drop,
equal to 2.4 7 times the inlet velocity head based on the velocity u, shown in Fig.
2-42b. In contrast, the free-discharge configuration has an inlet velocity head
t The following considerations relate to the fluid flow aspects of header design. Heat
transfer behavior of headers was considered previously for the geometry described in Fig.
2-22 and the associated text.
t The header is also referred to as the tank, the manifold, the box, or the distributor.

42 Compact Heat Exchangers
loss of unity, and the counterflow configuration has 0.595 times the inlet
velocity head loss, only one-quarter that of the parallel-flow configuration!
Clearly, if the option is available, a counterflow header arrangement is the
preferred geometry. Ofthe total header loss, about 74 and 50 percent, respec￾tively, for the parallel and counterflow arrangements is chargeable to the inlet
header and the balance to the outlet header. The outlet header loss is largely
associated with the nonuniform velocity distribution shown as uo(y) in Fig. 2-42b
and c. Of course, for the free-discharge header, all the loss is chargeable to the
inlet header.
While the foregoing results are based on a uniform inlet velocity Uj
' as shown
in Fig. 2-42b to 'd, experimental results (17) demonstrate that header perform￾ance is relatively insensitive to inlet velocity maldistribution.
The following expressions provide the geometrical description of the inlet
headers in terms of the header section area variation shown on Figs. 2-42b to d.
PARALLEL-FLOW INLET HEADER
A
COUNlERFLOW INLET HEADER
(2-31)
(2-32a)
(2-33)
FREE DISCHARGE INLET HEADER
A = (1- X)
Aj
The exit headers for the first geometries have a uniform section Ao
, a boxlike
geometry.
Examination ofEq. (2-31) for the parallel-flow geometry indicates that Aj (at
X = 0 for the inlet header) can be selected independently of Ao
(for the exit
header). In contrast, for the counterflow geometry, which is also boxlike, i.e., of
uniform section A = Aj, Eq. (2-32a) indicates that Aj/Ao
is fixed.
(2-32b)
As a point of interest, Eq. (2-33) for the free-discharge inlet header is derived
from Eq. (2-31) by allowing Ao/At
to become very large, as suggested by the
upper drawing in Fig. 2-42d.
Reference 17 provides, in addition to the header geometries, expressions for
pressure and velocity variations. Also provided are the derivations for the
following head-loss expressions chargeable to the headers.
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A
A = (1- X)
A

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 43
PARALLEL-FLOW HEADER
COUNTERFLOW HEADER
FREE-DISCHARGE HEADER
APt 4 -h = 1-2"= 0.595
I n
(2-34)
(2-35)
(2.36)
where APtdenotes the loss in "total" pressure and hi and ho
denote the inlet and
outlet velocity heads, or dynamic pressures, respectively.
Ifthe APt is small, say less than 10 percent, compared to the matrix AP, the
header design will not impact greatly on flow distribution. However, frequently
APtmay be higher than 30 percent ofthe matrix AP, and then the header design
becomes very important.
USEFUL RELATIONS FOR SURFACE AND CORE
GEOMETRY
Certain geometrical relations are necessary in the application of the basic heat
transfer and flow-friction data to the design problem. One particular set and
form of these relations that has proved to be convenient is given here.
The dimensions for the various surfaces in Tables 9-1 to 9-5 apply to the
equations below. These dimensions are, in effect, part ofthe basic design data for
the surface selected as indicated in the Fig. 2-12 methodology. They include the
following:
b = plate spacing (plate-fin surfaces only), ft or m
rh = flow-passage hydraulic radius A"L/A, ft or m
p= ratio of total transfer area of one side of exchanger to volume between
plates of that side (plate-fin surfaces only), ft2/ft3 or m2/m3
a = ratio of total transfer area of one side of exchanger to total exchanger
volume (given only for matrix, tubular, and finned-type surfaces), ft2/ft3 or
m2/m3
p = porosity, void volume/total volume (matrix surfaces only)
In addition, for the plate-fin surfaces, the plate thickness a, ft or m, must be
separately specified.
The following geometrical factors are required as a design result for each of
the two sides of the complete heat exchanger core:
APt 4 -h = 1-2"= 0.595
I n
1-2"= 0.595

44 Compact Heat Exchangers
A = total transfer area of one side of exchanger, ft2 or m2
Ac = free-How area of one side, ft2 or m2
Afr = frontal area of one side, ft2 or m2
L = How length on one side, ft or m
V = total exchanger volume, ft3 or m3
a = ratio of total transfer area of one side of exchanger to total exchanger
volume (this is already part of given basic data for matrix tubular and
finned-tube surfaces), ft2/ft3 or m2/m3
a = ratio of free-How to frontal area of one side of exchanger
The equations below give the relations between surface and core factors for
one side of the exchanger. Subscript 1 refers to anyone side, and 2 refers to the
other side; factors without a subscript are common to both sides. The same
relations apply to side 2 with the exchange of subscripts 1 for 2 and 2 for 1.
(2-37a)
(except for (2-37b)
matrix surfaces)
(except for matrix surfaces) (2-37d)
(plate-fin surfaces only)
(plate-fin surfaces only)
(except for matrix
surfaces)
(except for matrix surfaces)
(2-37c)
(2-37e)
(2-37/)
(2-37g)
A
p=_c =arh
Afr
(matrix surfaces only) (2-37h)
(for matrix surfaces only) (2-37i)
(matrix surfaces only) (2-37j)
A=~LA
p c
A = aLAfr
(matrix surfaces only) (2-37k)
(2-371)
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c
A=~LA
p c

(2-37n)
(2-37m)
Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 45
The following relationst apply for square-mesh crossed-rod matrices only:
7C p=I--
4xt
(J = (xt - 1)2
x;
Old =!!.-
x,
PROCEDURE FOR SIZING A HEAT EXCHANGER
(2-370)
(2-37p)
The methodology of heat exchanger design was previously considered in rela￾tion to Figs. 2-1 and 2-12. It is the purpose of this section to consider in some
detail the workings of the heat exchanger analysis procedure box of Fig. 2-12.
Two broad categories of problem specification are as follows. Given the core
geometry, the flow rates, and the entering fluid temperatures, what is the rating
of the heat exchanger? That is, what heat transfer rate and exchanger effective￾ness is predicted and what are the resulting outlet temperatures? Illustrations of
this rating procedure are covered in Appendix B. The second category, which is
the major subject of this section, is termed the sizing problem in distinction to
the rating problem. The sizing problem asks the following question: What is the
size of the core, given the flow rates and their entering and leaoing tempera￾tures? These in turn establish the desired heat transfer rate and exchanger
effectiveness. Clearly, one problem is the inverse of the other. The sizing
problem is the design problem, while the rating problem is a performance
prediction for a specified design.
The complete design of a heat exchanger involves a whole set of considera￾tions, as indicated by Fig. 2-12. In this section the term design will be used in a
very restricted sense. Suppose it is assumed that not only are the performance
characteristics completely established but also that the general type of heat
exchanger has been selected, the flow arrangement (counterflow, crossflow,
etc.) has been chosen, and the heat transfer surface configurations for the two
fluid sides have been selected. The problem then is to determine the dimensions
of the overall heat exchanger.
Note that, if a plate-fin type of heat exchanger is chosen, the designer can in
principle select the surface configurations for the two fluid sides completely
independently. This, in fact, is one of the virtues of the plate-fin construction.
The majority of the surface configurations considered in this book are of this
type. As an example, one might select surface number 11.1 from Fig. 9-4 for one
t For matrix surfaces, lX, rh, and p apply to the condition of perfect stacking, i.e., no
separation between layers.
=!!.-
x,
=!!.-
x,
=!!.-
x,

46 Compact Heat Exchangers
fluid side, and surface number 11.5-3/8W from Fig. 9-7 for the other side. Why
one would select a particular pair of surfaces for a particular application is
another question, discussed previously and not of concern here.
As a general rule, tubular surface configurations (for example, surface num￾ber CF-8.72(c) from Fig. 9-10, or surface number 9.68-0.87R from Fig. 9-13)
are so constructed that both fluid surfaces are specified, or else restricted to a
narrow range of possibilities, as soon as one surface is selected. Thus the
designer has somewhat less freedom in surface selection.
For rotating periodic-flow heat exchangers, the same surface is exposed to
each of the two fluids, so only one surface can be selected.
In any case, for present purposes it is assumed that the surfaces have been
established, as well as the flow arrangement and the desired operating parame￾ters. Under these conditions, it is possible to size a simple crossflow heat
exchanger, or a multipass crossflow heat exchanger, to yield a prescribed heat
exchanger effectiveness and independently prescribed pressure drops on both
fluid sides. Similarly, it is possible to size a rotating periodic-flow heat exchanger
for prescribed effectiveness and two independently prescribed pressure drops.
On the other hand, for a simple counterflow heat exchanger, it is possible to size
for prescribed effectiveness and for the pressure drop on only one of the two
fluid sides. The pressure drop on the other side becomes a dependent variable. It
can be changed only by selecting a different surface for that side. Note then that
the counterflow heat exchanger does not provide quite as much design flexibility
as either the simple or multipass crossflow exchanger, although it does in general
yield a higher effectiveness for a given amount of surface area (l.e., a given NtJ.
The procedure for sizing anyone of these heat exchangers is almost inevita￾bly an iterative one and thus lends itself very conveniently to computer imple￾mentation. To illustrate such a procedure, a simple crossflow arrangement will
be considered. It will then be shown how a multipass crossflow heat exchanger
can be easily derived from a single-pass crossflow design. A procedure for
designing a counterflow heat exchanger can then be easily inferred, subject to
the restriction that only one fluid pressure drop can be independently pre￾scribed. This procedure is also very easily adapted to the design of a rotating
periodic-flow heat exchanger.
Figure 2-43 shows the geometry of a single-pass crossflow heat exchanger. It
will be assumed that each pass is unmixed. The two fluids will be designated by
subscripts hand e. The two fluid flow rates, Wh and We' are specified, as well as
all four terminal temperatures and the pressure drop for each fluid. The problem
is to determine the three dimensions a, b, and c, and thus the volume and
(usually) the weight of the heat exchanger. Note that a is the flow length for the
hot fluid, b is the flow length for the cold fluid, and e is a "no-flow" dimension
that might be scaled up or down if the flow rates are changed in proportion to
each other, all other specifications remaining the same.
Note that the frontal area for the hot fluid (i.e., the cross section facing fluid h)
is be. Similarly, the frontal area for the cold fluid is ae.
The first step, after having chosen the two surfaces, is to assemble the
geometric characteristics of the surface pair:

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 47
rh.h
ah
Cth
(Af/A)h
(Aw/A)h
"h
rh.e
a,
Cte
(Af/A)e
(Aw/A)e
"e
(2-38)
The equations in the preceding section can be used to determine the a's and
the a's.
The next question is what to use for an iteration variable. A very convenient
variable is the mass velocity G for each side of the heat exchanger, since it is easy
to make a reasonable initial estimate of both G's, and the design will converge
rapidly by a simple adjustment of the G's. Note that G is the mass flow rate W
divided by the flow cross-sectional area Ac
• Ac
is in turn related to the frontal area
Arrthrough a. Thus, when Gh and Gc are specified, the frontal areas be and ae are
fixed. The complete dimensions ofthe heat exchanger are then established when
the volume V is determined.
A first estimate of Gh and Gc can be made using the following approximate
relation:
G"" _g_c V f Nt u vmPr
2
/
3
This relation is derived from the core-velocity equation (2-30b) by treating 110 as
unity (neglecting fin ineffectiveness) and taking
In this last approximation it is implied that in Eqs. (2-2) or (2-10) the wall
resistance is negligible and the convective heat transfer resistances are approxi￾mately equally distributed on the two sides of the heat exchanger.
As previously discussed, the ratio StPr2
/
3
/f tends to be reasonably constant
over a 2 : 1 Reynolds number range for most surfaces and does not vary greatly
from surface to surface, as can be seen in Fig. 2-41. It can be estimated from the
basic data curves for the surfaces in question, but a figure of 0.3 provides a good
starting point in any case, since this is merely the initial estimate for an iterative
procedure. ~p is the desired pressure drop for the side in question, and Nt u is
determined for the desired heat exchanger effectiveness and the Cmin/Cmax,
derived from the given flow rates (see Fig. 2-14 or Table 2-3).
With initial estimates of Gh and Gc
' the following variables can be evaluated
in succession:
1. Reh
2. (StPr2
/
3
)h
3. fh
4. hh
5. '1f,h
6. n,»
7. (UAh
8. Ah
Rec
(StPr2
/
3
)e
fc
he
'1f.e
'10.0
or (UA)e
or Ae
from the definition of Reynolds number
from the basic data curves
from the basic data curves
from (2) and the G's
from Eq. (2-4)
from Eq. (2-3)
from Eq. (2-2)
from (7) and Nt u

48 Compact Heat Exchangers
9. V from A and a
10. ac be from the C's, W's, and (J
11. a, b, c from V and ac and be
12. (Ke, Ke)h (Ke, Ke)e from (Jh' a., Reh' Ree
13. (IiP/PIh (liP/PI)e from Eq. (2-26a)
These pressure-drop results are then compared with those specified for the
design, and new estimates of Gh and Ge are made according to the following
approximation, which comes directly from Eq. (2-26a):
Goc ill (2-39)
The procedure is then repeated until the two pressure drops are within some
predetermined fraction of the specified pressure drops. The convergence is
generally quite rapid, often no more than three or four iterations. It can be done
by hand calculator but obviously lends itself very well to a computer program.
A multipass cross-counterflow heat exchanger can be designed using a simple
modification ofthe same procedure. Examine the two heat exchangers shown in
Fig. 2-43. Both have the same volume and therefore the same amount ofsurface
area, if the surface configurations are the same. Both have the same frontal areas
and therefore the same free-flow areas. Ifthe flow rates are the same, both have
the same G's. The total flow length for each fluid is the same, and except for any
pressure drop associated with the turning of the cold fluid between passes, the
pressure drops for each fluid must then be the same. VA must be the same, and
thus so must Ntu • In fact, the only difference is the effectiveness, which is higher
for the two-pass case, since the applicable effectiveness solution is Fig. 2-20 or
Eq. (2-18) rather than Fig. 2-16. It is apparent, then, that a multipass exchanger
can be designed as a single-pass exchanger, but using the multipass value ofNtu ,
and then the overall dimensions can be transformed as in Fig. 2-43.
Numerical examples for the exercise of the foregoing procedure for the
design, or sizing, problem can be readily formulated from any of the four
illustrative rating-type problems presented in Appendix B.Recall that the prob￾lem specification box of Fig. 2-12 would start for this exercise with one of the
performance result sets derived in Appendix B and then, presumably, the sizing
procedure, after several iterations, would result in the core dimensions pictured
in the appropriate Appendix B sketch, Fig. B-1, B-3, B-4, or B-5.
REFERENCES
1. Mason, J. L.: A Design System for Compact Heat Exchangers, lectures presented at
University of California, Los Angeles, Sept. 5-15, 1961.
2. Cardner, K. A.: Efficiency of Extended Surfaces, Trans. ASME, vol. 67, pp. 621-631,
1945.
3. Mason, J. L.: Heat Transfer in Cross-Flow, Proc. Appl. Mechanics, 2nd U.S. Nat.
Congress, p. 801, 1954.
4. Stevens, R. A., J. Fernandez, and J. R. Woolf: Mean-Temperature Difference in One,
Two and Three-Pass Cross flow Heat Exchangers, Trans. ASME, vol. 79, pp. 287 - 297,
1957.
5. Kays, W. M., R. K. Jain, and S. Sabherwal: International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer, vol. II, pp. 772 -774, 1968.

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 49
6. Wright, C. C.: Parallel-Counter-Flow Shell-Tube Exchangers, unpublished Stanford
University mechanical engineering report.
7. Bowman, R. A., D. C. Mueller, and W. M. Nagle: Mean Temperature Differences in
Heat Exchanger Design, Trans. ASME, vol. 62, p. 283, 1940.
8. Iqbal, M., and J. W. Stachiewiez: Thermal Effectiveness of a Split-Flow Exchanger,
ASME Paper 62-HT-29.
9. McAdams, W. H.: "Heat Transmission," 2d. ed., McGraw-HilI Book Company, New
York, 1954, pp. 194-195.
10. London, A. L., and W. M. Kays: The Liquid-Coupled Indirect-Transfer Regenerator
for Gas-Turbine Plants, Trans. ASME, vol. 73, p. 529, 1951.
11. Coppage, J. K, and A. L. London: The Periodic-Flow Regenerator-A Summary of
Design Theory, Trans. ASME, vol. 75, p. 779, 1953.
12. Lambertson, T. J.: Performance Factors of a Periodic-Flow Heat Exchanger, Trans.
ASME, vol. 80, p. 586, 1958.
13. Bahnke, G. D., and C. P. Howard: The Effect of Longitudinal Heat Conduction on
Periodic-Flow Heat Exchanger Performance, Trans. ASME, vol. 86, p. 121, 1964.
14. Mondt, J. R.: Vehicular Gas Turbine Periodic-Flow Heat Exchanger Solid and Fluid
Temperature Distributions, Trans. ASME, vol. 86, p. 121, 1964.
15. Hryniszak, W.: "Heat Exchangers," Academic Press, Inc., New York, 1958.
16. Harper, D. B.: Seal Leakage in the Rotary Regenerator and Its Effect on Rotary
Regenerator Design for Gas Turbines, Trans. ASME, vol. 79, p. 233, 1957.
17. London, A. L., G. Klopfer, and S. Wolf: Oblique Flow Headers for Heat Exchangers,
Trans. ASME, vol. 90, p. 271, 1968.

50 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 2-2 Counterflow Exchanger Performance
Exchanger effectiveness (e) asa function of capacity-ratio ratio (emln/emU) and number of heat
transfer units (N,ul
e for indicated capacity-rate ratios. Cm;n/Cmax
N"
0 0.25 0.50 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.90 1.00
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.25 0.221 0.216 0.210 0.206 0.205 0.204 0.202 0.200
0.50 0.393 0.378 0.362 0.350 0.348 0.345 0.339 0.333
0.75 0.528 0.502 0.477 0.457 0.452 0.447 0.438 0.429
1.00 0.632 0.598 0.565 0.538 0.532 0.525 0.513 0.500
1.25 0.713 0.675 0.635 0.603 0.595 0.587 0.571 0.556
1.50 0.777 0.735 0.691 0.655 0.645 0.636 0.618 0.600
1.75 0.826 0.784 0.737 0.697 0.687 0.677 0.657 0.636
2.00 0.865 0.823 0.775 0.733 0.722 0.711 0.689 0.667
2.50 0.918 0.880 0.833 0.788 0.777 0.764 0.740 0.714
3.00 0.950 0.919 0.875 0.829 0.817 0.804 0.778 0.750
3.50 0.970 0.945 0.905 0.861 0.848 0.835 0.807 0.778
4.00 0.982 0.962 0.928 0.886 0.873 0.860 0.831 0.800
4.50 0.989 0.974 0.944 0.905 0.893 0.880 0.850 0.818
5.00 0.993 0.982 0.957 0.921 0.909 0.896 0.866 0.833
5.50 0.996 0.988 0.968 0.933 0.922 0.909 0.880 0.846
6.00 0.975 0.944 0.921 0.892 0.857
6.50 0.980 0.953 0.930 0.902 0.867
7.00 0.985 0.960 0.939 0.910 0.875
7.50 0.988 0.966 0.946 0.918 0.882
8.00 0.991 0.971 0.952 0.925 0.889
8.50 0.993 0.975 0.957 0.931 0.895
9.00 0.994 0.979 0.962 0.936 0.900
9.50 0.996 0.982 0.966 0.941 0.905
10.00 0.997 0.985 0.970 0.945 0.909
00 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000

Table 2-3 Parallel-Flow Exchanger Performance
Exchanger effectiveness (I:)as a function of capacity-rate ratio (Cmln/Cmu) andnumber of heattransfer
units (Nt.)
f for indicated capacity-rate ratios, Gmin/emu
»;
0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0 0 0 0 0 0
0.25 0.221 0.215 0.208 0.202 0.197
0.50 0.393 0.372 0.352 0.333 0.316
0.75 0.528 0.487 0.450 0.418 0.388
1.00 0.632 0.571 0.518 0.472 0.432
1.25 0.713 0.632 0.564 0.507 0.459
1.50 0.777 0.677 0.596 0.530 0.475
1.75 0.826 0.710 0.618 0.544 0.485
2.00 0.865 0.734 0.633 0.554 0.491
2.50 0.918 0.765 0.651 0.564 0.497
3.00 0.950 0.781 0659 0.568 0.498
3.50 0.970 0.790 0.663 0.570 0.499
4.00 0.982 0.795 0.665 0.571 0.500
4.50 0.989 0.797 0.666 0571 0.500
5.00 0.993 0.799 0.666 0.571 0500
00 1.000 0.800 0.667 0.571 0.500
Table 2-4 Crossflow Exchanger with Both Fluids Un-Mixed
Crossflow (both fluids un-mixed) exchanger effectiveness (I:) asa function ofcapacity-rate ratio (Cm;.IC...,)
andnumber of heattransfer units (N.J
E for indicated capacity-rate ratios, Cmin/emax
NlU
0.00 0.25 050 0.75 1.00
0.00 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
0.25 0.221 0.215 0.209 0.204 0.199
0.50 0.393 0.375 0.358 0.341 0.:126
0.75 0.528 0.49.'i 0.466 0.439 0.413
1.00 0.632 0.588 0.547 0.510 0.476
1.25 0.714 0.660 0.610 0.565 0.:,23
1..'iO 0.777 0.716 0.660 0.608 0.560
1.75 0.826 0761 0.700 0.642 0590
2.00 0.865 0.797 07:l2 0.671 0.614
2.50 0.918 0.851 0.78:1 l1.7l(i 0.652
3.00 0.950 0.888 0.819 0749 0.681
350 0.970 0.915 0.848 0.776 0.704
4.00 0.982 0.934 0.869 0.797 0.722
4.50 0.989 0.948 0.887 0.814 :>.737
5.00 0.99:1 0.959 0.901 0.829 (7)1
6.00 0.997 0.974 0.924 0.853 0.772
7.00 0.999 0.98:1 0.940 0.871 0.789
00 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
51

52 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 2-5 Crossflow Exchanger with One Fluid Mixed
Crossflow (one fluid "mixed," the other fluid "unmixed") exchanger effectiveness (e) as a function of
capacity-rate ratio (Cmlxed/Cunmixed) and number of heat transfer units (N,u)
f for indicated capacity-rate ratios, Cmixed/Cunmixed
Ntu
0 0.25 4.00 0.50 2.00 0.75 1.333 1.000
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.25 0.221 0.215 0.213 0.209 0.209 0.204 0.204 0.198
0.50 0.393 0.375 0.375 0.358 0.357 0.341 0.341 0.325
0.75 0.528 0.495 0.494 0.465 0.463 0.463 0.435 0.410
1.00 0.632 0.587 0.585 0.545 0.542 0.505 0.503 0.469
1.25 0.713 0.658 0.654 0.605 0.600 0.556 0.552 0.510
1.50 0.777 0.714 0.706 0.652 0.644 0.594 0.589 0.540
1.75 0.758 0.747 0.689 0.677 0.623 0.616 0.562
2.00 0.865 0.793 0.778 0.715 0.702 0.645 0.636 0.579
2.50 0.918 0.844 0.820 0.760 0.736 0.677 0.663 0.601
3.00 0.950 0.879 0.846 0.789 0.756 0.697 0.679 0.613
3.50 0.970 0.903 0.861 0.808 0.768 0.710 0.689 0.621
4.00 0.982 0.920 0.870 0.823 0.776 0.718 0.695 0.625
4.50 0.989 0.933 0.876 0.834 0.780 0.724 0.698 0.628
5.00 0.993 0.942 0.880 0.841 0.783 0.728 0.700 0630
00 1.000 0.982 0.865 0.787 0.736 0.703 0.632
Table 2-6 Crossflow Exchanger with Both Fluids Mixed
Crossflow (both fluids mixed) exchanger effectiveness (e) as a function of capacity-rate ratio (Cmtn/Cm",)
and number of heat transfer units (N,u)
e for indicated capacity-rate ratios, Gmin/Cmax
Ntu
0 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.20 0.181 0.178 0.175 0.172 0.169 0.166
0.60 0.451 0.431 0.412 0.395 0.378 0.362
1.00 0.632 0.593 0.557 0.523 0.491 0.462
1.40 0.753 0.698 0.647 0.599 0.555 0.515
1.80 0.835 0.767 0.703 0.645 0.591 0.543
2.00 0.865 0.792 0.723 0.660 0.603 0.552
2.20 0.889 0.812 0.739 0.672 0.611 0.557
2.60 0.926 0.841 0.761 0.687 0.621 0.563
3.00 0.950 0.860 0.774 0.695 0.625 0.565
3.50 0.970 0.875 0.783 0.700 0.626 0.563
4.00 0.982 0.884 0.787 0.700 0.624 0.559
4.50 0.989 0.888 0.789 0.698 0.621 0.555
5.00 0.993 0.890 0.788 0.695 0.617 0.551

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 53
Table 2-7 Counterflow Exchanger with Crossflow Headers
efor Cmin/Cmax = 0.20
»: Ntu , crossflow
counter￾flow 0 2 3 4 5 6 7
0 0 0.597 0.811 0.903 0.946 0.969 0.982 0.989
1 0.605 0.825 0.914 0.955 0.975 0.986 0.992 0.995
2 0.834 0.923 0.961 0.979 0.989 0.993 0.996 0.998
3 0.927 0.966 0.983 0.991 0.995 0.997 0.998 0.999
4 0.967 0.985 0.992 0.996 0.998 0.999 0.999 1.000
5 0.985 0.993 0.997 0.998 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000
6 0.995 0.997 0.998 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
7 0.998 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
efor Cmin/Cmox = 0.40
s.: N tu • crossflow
counter￾flow 0 2 3 4 5 6 7
0 0 0.564 0.759 0.848 0.898 0.928 0.948 0.961
1 0.577 0.783 0.871 0.916 0.942 0.959 0.970 0.978
2 0.795 0.887 0.930 0.954 0.968 0.977 0.983 0.988
3 0.897 0.940 0.962 0.975 0.982 0.987 0.991 0.993
4 0.945 0.968 0.979 0.986 0.990 0.993 0.995 0.996
5 0.970 0.982 0.989 0.992 0.995 0.996 0.997 0.998
6 0.985 0.990 0.994 0.996 0.997 0.998 0.998 0.999
7 0.991 0.995 0.997 0.998 0.998 0.999 0.999 0.999
efor Cmin/Cmox = 0.60
»: N tu , crossflow
counter￾flow 0 2 3 4 5 6 7
0 0 0.532 0.708 0.792 0.842 0.875 0.898 0.916
1 0.552 0.739 0.821 0.867 0.896 0.917 0.931 0.943
2 0.754 0.843 0.888 0.914 0.932 0.945 0.954 0.962
3 0.854 0.902 0.928 0.944 0.955 0.963 0.969 0.974
4 0.908 0.937 0.953 0.963 0.970 0.976 0.980 0.983
5 0.940 0.959 0.969 0.976 0.980 0.984 0.986 0.988
6 0.963 0.973 0.980 0.984 0.987 0.989 0.991 0.992
7 0.975 0.982 0.987 0.989 0.991 0.993 0.994 0.995
(continued)

54 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 2-7 Counterflow Exchanger with Crossflow Headers (continued)
efor =0.8
»: Ntu • crossflow
counter￾flow 0 2 3 4 5 6 7
0 0 0.503 0.660 0.736 0.783 0.815 0.838 0.856
I 0.512 0.694 0.768 0.811 0.840 0.860 0.876 0.889
2 0.712 0.793 0.835 0.861 0.880 0.894 0.905 0.914
3 0.805 0.852 0.878 0.896 0.908 0.918 0.926 0.932
4 0.860 0.891 0.908 0.920 0.929 0.936 0.942 0.947
5 0.895 0.917 0.929 0.938 0.945 0.950 0.954 0.958
6 0.922 0.936 0.945 0.951 0.956 0.960 0.963 0.966
7 0.940 0.950 0.957 0.961 0.965 0.968 0.971 0.973
efor Cmin/Cmxx = 1.00
»: Nt u , crossflow
counter￾flow 0 2 3 4 5 6 7
0 0 0.476 0.615 0.682 0.723 0.752 0.773 0.790
I 0.500 0.649 0.714 0.751 0.777 0.795 0.810 0.821
2 0.667 0.739 0.775 0.798 0.815 0.828 0.838 0.846
3 0.750 0.792 0.816 0.831 0.843 0.852 0.860 0.866
4 0.800 0.828 0.844 0.855 0.863 0.870 0.876 0.880
5 0.834 0.853 0.865 0.873 0.880 0.885 0.889 0.893
6 0.856 0.872 0.881 0.887 0.892 0.897 0.900 0.903
7 0.875 0.886 0.893 0.899 0.903 0.906 0.909 0.912

Table 2-8 Parallel-Counterflow Exchanger with Shell Fluid Mixed
Parallel-counterflow (onefluid mixed)exchanger effectiveness (e) as a functionof capacity-rate ratio
(Cmt./CmOJ<) and numberof heattransferunits (Ntu)
e for indicated capacity-rate ratios, Cmin/Cmax
Ntu
0.0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
0.00 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
0.25 0.221 0.215 0.209 0.204 0.198
0.50 0.393 0.375 0.357 0.340 0.324
0.75 0.528 0.494 0.463 0.434 0.407
1.00 0.632 0.584 0.540 0.500 0.463
1.25 0.714 0.652 0.597 0.546 0.500
1.50 0.777 0.705 0.639 0.579 0.526
1.75 0.826 0.744 0.670 0.603 0.544
2.00 0.865 0.775 0.693 0.620 0.557
2.50 0.918 0.816 0.724 0.642 0.572
3.00 0.950 0.841 0.741 0.654 0.579
3.50 0.970 0.855 0.751 0.660 0.582
4.00 0.982 0.864 0.757 0.663 0.584
4.50 0.989 0.869 0.760 0.665 0.585
5.00 0.993 0.872 0.762 0.666 0.585
00 1.000 0.877 0.764 0.667 0.586
Table 2-9a Split-Flow Exchanger, CtUbe = Gm;n
Split-flowexchangerwith shellfluid mixed.Exchanger effectiveness (e) as a functionof capacity-rate
ratio (Cml./CmOJ<) and numberof transfer units (Nt.) for C'ube = Cml•
e for indicated capacity-rate ratios, C,/Cm;.
»:
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.5 0.393 0.378 0.364 0.350 0.337 0.324
1.0 0.632 0.583 0.557 0.523 0.491 0.462
1.5 0.777 0.718 0.663 0.613 0.566 0.524
2.0 0.865 0.791 0.722 0.660 0.603 0.552
2.5 0.918 0.833 0.755 0.683 0.619 0.562
3.0 0.950 0.857 0.771 0.693 0.624 0.564
3.5 0.970 0.870 0.778 0.695 0.623 0.561
4.0 0.982 0.876 0.779 0.693 0.619 0.556
4.5 0.989 0.878 0.777 0.689 0.614 0.551
5.0 0.993 0.877 0.773 0.683 0.607 0.545
5.5 0.996 0.875 0.768 0.676 0.601 0.538
6.0 0.998 0.872 0.762 0.670 0.594 0.532
6.5 0.999 0.868 0.756 0.663 0.588 0.526
7.0 0.999 0.864 0.750 0.656 0.581 0.520
7.5 0.999 0.860 0.744 0.650 0.575 0.515
8.0 1.000 0.856 0.738 0.644 0.569 0.510
8.5 1.000 0.852 0.732 0.638 0.564 0.505
9.0 1.000 0.849 0.727 0.632 0.559 0.500
9.5 1.000 0.846 0.722 0.627 0.554 0.496
10.0 1.000 0.843 0.718 0.622 0.549 0.492
55

56 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 2-9b Split-Flow Exchanger, Cah811 = Cm1n
Split-flowexchanger(shellfluid mixed)effectiveness (e) as a function of capacityrate (GmtnfGm",,) and
numberof heat transferunits (Ntu) for Gshell = Gmln
e for indicated capacity-rate ratios, C,jCmin
N,.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.5 0.393 0.378 0.364 0.350 0.337 0.324
1.0 0.632 0.593 0.557 0.523 0.492 0.462
1.5 0.777 0.718 0.664 0.613 0.567 0.524
2.0 0.865 0.792 0.723 0.661 0.603 0.552
2.5 0.918 0.835 0.757 0.685 0.620 0.562
3.0 0.950 0.861 0.775 0.697 0.626 0.564
3.5 0.970 0.876 0.785 0.701 0.627 0.561
4.0 0.982 0.884 0.789 0.702 0.624 0.556
4.5 0.989 0.889 0.791 0.700 0.620 0.551
5.0 0.993 0.892 0.790 0.697 0.615 0.544
5.5 0.996 0.893 0.789 0.693 0.609 0.538
6.0 0.998 0.893 0.787 0.689 0.604 0.532
6.5 0.999 0.893 0.785 0.685 0.599 0.526
7.0 0.999 0.892 0.782 0.680 0.593 0.520
7.5 0.999 0.892 0.780 0.676 0.588 0.515
8.0 1.000 0.891 0.777 0.672 0.583 0.510
8.5 1.000 0.890 0.774 0.668 0.578 0.505
9.0 1.000 0.889 0.771 0.664 0.573 0.500
9.5 1.000 0.888 0.769 0.660 0.569 0.496
10.0 1.000 0.887 0.766 0.656 0.564 0.492

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 57
Table 2-10 Periodic-Flow Exchanger, Cmln/Cmax = 1.0
Exchanger effectiveness (e)as a function of matrix capacity-rateratio (CrlCmbJ and modifiednumberof
heat transfer units (Ntu,o)
e for the indicated matrix capacity-rate ratios, C,/Cmin
Ntu,o
1.0 1.25 1.5 2.0 3.0 5.0 10.0 00
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.5 0.322 0.326 0.328 0.330 0.332 0.333 0.333 0.333
1.0 0.467 0.478 0.485 0.491 0.496 0.499 0.500 0.500
1.5 0.548 0.566 0.576 0.586 0.594 0.598 0.599 0.600
2.0 0.601 0.623 0.636 0.649 0.659 0.664 0.666 0.667
2.5 0.639 0.665 0.679 0.694 0.705 0.711 0.713 0.714
3.0 0.667 0.696 0.712 0.728 0.740 0.746 0.749 0.750
3.5 0.690 0.721 0.738 0.755 0.767 0.774 0.777 0.778
4.0 0.709 0.741 0.759 0.776 0.789 0.796 0.799 0.800.
4.5 0.724 0.758 0.776 0.794 0.807 0.814 0.817 0.818
5.0 0.738 0.772 0.791 0.809 0.822 0.829 0.832 0.833
5.5 0.749 0.785 0.803 0.821 0.834 0.842 0.845 0.846
6.0 0.759 0.796 0.814 0.832 0.845 0.853 0.856 0.857
6.5 0.768 0.805 0.824 0.842 0.855 0.862 0.865 0.867
7.0 0.776 0.814 0.833 0.850 0.863 0.870 0.874 0.875
7.5 0.784 0.822 0.840 0.858 0.871 0.878 0.881 0.882
8.0 0.790 0.829 0.847 0.865 0.877 0.884 0.888 0.889
8.5 0.796 0.835 0.854 0.871 0.883 0.890 0.894 0.895
9.0 0.802 0.841 0.859 0.876 0.888 0.895 0.899 0.900
9.5 0.807 0.846 0.864 0.881 0.893 0.900 0.904 0.905
10.0 0.8/1 0.851 0.869 0.886 0.898 0.904 0.908 0.909
20.0 0.865 0.906 0.922 0.935 0.943 0.948 0.951 0.952
50.0 0.914 0.951 0.962 0.970 0.975 0.978 0.980 0.980
90.0 0.935 0.969 0.977 0.982 0.986 0.987 0.988 0.989
100.0 0.939 0.979 0.984 0.989 0.989 0.990
500.0 0.974 0.995 0.996 0.998 0.998 0.998

58 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 2-11 Periodic-Flow Exchanger, Cmln/Cmax = 0.95
Exchanger effectiveness (e)as a functionof matrix capacity-rate ratio (Cr/Cm 1n ) and modifiednumberof
heat transferunits (N,u,.)
e for the indicated matrix capacity-rate ratios, Cr/Cmin
Ntu,o
1.0 1.25 1.5 2.0 3.0 5.0 10.0 00
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.5 0.325 0.329 0.331 0.333 0.335 0.336 0.336 0.336
1.0 0.471 0.483 0.490 0.497 0.502 0.505 0.506 0.506
1.5 0.554 0.573 0.584 0.594 0.602 0.607 0.608 0.609
2.0 0.608 0.632 0.645 0.659 0.669 0.675 0.677 0.678
2.5 0.647 0.674 0.690 0.706 0.717 0.723 0.726 0.727
3.0 0.676 0.707 0.723 0.741 0.753 0.760 0.763 0.764
3.5 0.699 0.732 0.750 0.768 0.781 0.789 0.792 0.793
4.0 0.718 0.753 0.772 0.790 0.804 0.811 0.8\5 0.816
4.5 0.734 0.770 0.790 0.809 0.822 0.830 0.833 0.835
5.0 0.748 0.785 0.805 0.824 0.838 0.846 0.849 0.850
5.5 0.759 0.798 0.8\8 0.837 0.851 0.859 0.862 0.864
6.0 0.770 0.809 0.829 0.848 0.862 0.870 0.874 0.875
6.5 0.779 0.8\9 0.839 0.858 0.872 0.880 0.884 0.885
7.0 0.787 0.828 0.848 0.867 0.881 0.889 0.892 0.893
7.5 0.794 0.836 0.856 0.875 0.889 0.896 0.900 0.901
8.0 0.80\ 0.843 0.863 0.882 0.895 0.903 0.906 0.908
8.5 0.807 0.850 0.870 0.888 0.90\ 0.909 0.912 0.914
9.0 0.813 0.855 0.876 0.894 0.907 0.914 0.9\8 0.919
9.5 0.818 0.861 0.881 0.899 0.912 0.919 0.923 0.924
10.0 0.823 0.866 0.886 0.904 0.917 0.924 0.927 0.928
20.0 0.877 0.940 0.954 0.968 0.97\ 0.972
50.0 0.926 0.969 0.978 0.987 0.992 0.994 0.995 0.996
90.0 0.947 0.985 0.993 0.996 0.998 0.999 0.999 0.999
100.0 0.950 0.994 0.997 0.999 1.000 1.000

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 59
Table 2-12 Periodic-Flow Exchanger, Cmin/Cmax = 0.90
Exchanger effectiveness (8)as a function of matrix capacity-rate ratio (Cr/Cmln) andmodified number of
heattransfer units (N'n,o)
e for the indicated matrix capacity-rate ratios, CT/Cmin
Ntu,o
1.0 1.25 1.5 2,0 3,0 5,0 10,0 00
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0,5 0.327 0,331 0,334 0.336 0,338 0,338 0.339 0.339
1.0 0.476 0,489 0,496 0,503 0,508 0,511 0,512 0,513
1.5 0,560 0.580 0,591 0,603 0.611 0.616 0.617 0,618
2.0 0.616 0.641 0.655 0.669 0.680 0,686 0.688 0.689
2.5 0.655 0,684 0,700 0.717 0.729 0,736 0.739 0.740
3,0 0.685 0,717 0.735 0.753 0.766 0.774 0.777 0,778
3.5 0,708 0,743 0,762 0.781 0.795 0.803 0.806 0,807
4.0 0.727 0.764 0.784 0.804 0.819 0.826 0.830 0,831
4.5 0.744 0.782 0,803 0,823 0.838 0.846 0.849 0.850
5,0 0.757 0.797 0,818 0,839 0,853 0.862 0.865 0.866
5,5 0,769 0.810 0,831 0.852 0.867 0,875 0.879 0.880
6,0 0,780 0.822 0,843 0.864 0,878 0.887 0.890 0,892
6,5 0.789 0.832 0,853 0,874 0,888 0,896 0,900 0.902
7.0 0.797 0.841 0,862 0.883 0,897 0.905 0.909 0.910
7.5 0.804 0.849 0.871 0,891 0,905 0.9l3 0.917 0.918
8.0 0,811 0.856 0,879 0,898 0.912 0,920 0.923 0.925
8.5 0.817 0.863 0,884 0,904 0.918 0.926 0,929 0.931
9.0 0.823 0.869 0,891 0.910 0.923 0.931 0,935 0936
9,5 0,828 0.874 0.896 0.915 0.928 0,936 0.939 0.941
10.0 0.833 0.880 0,901 0.920 0,933 0.940 0.944 0.945
20.0 0.887 0,954 0.968 0.981 0,984 0.985
40.0 0.925 0.984 0.992 0.997 0.998 0.998
100.0 0,956 0.999 0.999 1.000 1.000 1.000

60 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 2-13 Periodic-Flow Exchanger Cmln/Cmax = 0.80
Exchanger effectiveness (e)as a function of matrix capacity-rate ratio (Cr/Cm1n) andmodified number of
heattransfer units (N'n.o)
E for the indicated matrix capacity-rate ratios, Cr/Cmin
Ntu,o
1.0 1.25 1.5 2.0 3.0 5.0 10.0 x
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.5 0.332 0.337 0.339 O.:HI 0.34:, 0.344 0.345 O.:H;)
1.0 0.486 0.500 0.507 0.515 0.521 0.524 0.525 0.52;)
1.5 0.573 0.595 0.607 0.619 0.629 0.634 0.636 0.636
2.0 0.630 0.657 0.67:; 0.689 0.701 0.707 0.710 0.711
2.5 0.670 0.702 0.721 0.739 0.753 0.760 0.763 0.764
3.0 0.70\ 0.737 0.757 0.777 0.792 0.800 0.803 0.804
3.5 0.725 0.763 0.785 0.806 0.822 0.830 0.834 0.835
4.0 0.744 0.785 0.808 0.830 0.B46 0.855 0.858 0.860
4.:) 0.760 0.804 0.827 0.849 0.861; 0.874 0.878 0.880
5.0 0.774 0.819 0.843 0.866 0.882 0.891 0.894 0.896
5.5 0.786 0.8:,2 0.856 0.879 0.895 0.904 0.908 0.909
6.0 0.797 0.844 0.868 0.891 0.907 0.915 0.919 0.921
6.5 0.806 0.854 0.879 0.901 0.917 0.925 0.929 O.'!:lO
7.0 0.814 0.863 0.888 0.910 0.925 O.9:l:l 0.9:,9
7.5 0.821 0.871 0.896 0918 0.93:, 0.941 0.944 0.946
8.0 0.1l211 0.879 0.903 0.925 O.9:l<.J 0.947 0.951 0.952
8.5 0.834 0.886 0.910 0.931 0.94;, 0.952 0.%6 0.');,7
9.0 0.839 0.1l92 0.916 0.9:Hi 0.950 0.957 0.961 0.%2
9.5 0.1l45 0.897 0.92\ 0.~141 0.9;,5 0.% 1 0.9G5 0.966
10.0 0.849 0.902 0.926 0.946 0.959 0.%.1 O.9611 0.970

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 61
Table 2-14 Periodic-Flow Exchanger, Cmln/Cmax = 0.70
Exchanger effectiveness (e)as a functionof matrixcapacity-rate ratio(C,fCml. ) andmodified number of
heattransferunits(N,u)
E for the indicated matrix capacity-rate ratios, C,/C m;.
Ntu. o
1.0 1.25 1.50 2.00 3.00 5.00 10.00 00
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.5 0.337 0.342 0.344 0.347 0.349 0.350 0.350 0.350
1.0 0.496 0.510 0.519 0.527 0.533 0.537 0.538 0.538
1.5 0.586 0.609 0.622 0.636 0.646 0.652 0.654 0.655
2.0 0.644 0.674 0.691 0.709 0.722 0.729 0.732 0.733
2.5 0.685 0.720 0.740 0.761 0.776 0.784 0.787 0.788
3.0 0.716 0.755 0.777 0.800 0.816 0.825 0.828 0.829
3.5 0.740 0.782 0.806 0.830 0.847 0.856 0.860 0.861
4.0 0.759 0.804 0.829 0.854 0.871 0.880 0.884 0.886
4.5 0.775 0.823 0.848 0.873 0.890 0.900 0.904 0.905
5.0 0.789 0.838 0.864 0.889 0.906 0.915 0.919 0.921
5.5 0.800 0.851 0.878 0.903 0.919 0.928 0.932 0.933
6.0 0.810 0.863 0.890 0.914 0.930 0.939 0.943 0.944
6.5 0.819 0.873 0.900 0.92;4 0.939 0.948 0.951 0.953
7.0 0.827 0.882 0.909 0.932 0.947 0.955 0.959 0.960
7.5 0.834 0.890 0.916 0.939 0.954 0.961 0.965 0.966
8.0 0.840 0.897 0.923 0.946 0.960 0.967 0.970 0.971
8.5 0.846 0.903 0.929 0.951 0.965 0.971 0.974 0.975
9.0 0.851 0.909 0.935 0.956 0.969 0.975 0.978 0.979
9.5 0.856 0.914 0.940 0.960 0.972 0.978 0.981 0.982
10.0 0.860 0.919 0.944 0.964 0.976 0.981 0.984 0.985

Table 2-15 Periodic-Flow Exchanger, Cmln/Cmax = 0.50
Exchanger effectivess (e)as a function of matrix capacity-rate ratio (CrIC m1n) and modified number of
heat transfer units (N'n.o)
E for the indicated capacity-rate ratios, Cr/Cmin
Ntu,o
1.0 1.25 1.50 2.00 3.00 5.00 10.00 00
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0.5 0.348 0.353 0.356 0.359 0.361 0.362 0.362 0.362
1.0 0.516 0.532 0.542 0.552 0.559 0.563 0.564 0.565
1.5 0.610 0.637 0.652 0.669 0.681 0.687 0.690 0.691
2.0 0.669 0.704 0.725 0.746 0.762 0.770 0.773 0.775
2.5 0.710 0.752 0.776 0.800 0.818 0.828 0.832 0.833
3.0 0.740 0.787 0.813 0.840 0.859 0.869 0.873 0.874
3.5 0.763 0.814 0.842 0.870 0.889 0.899 0.903 0.905
4.0 0.782 0.835 0.865 0.893 0.912 0.922 0.926 0.927
4.5 0.797 0.853 0.883 0.911 0.930 0.939 0.943 0.944
5.0 0.809 0.867 0.898 0.926 0.944 0.952 0.956 0.957
5.5 0.819 0.879 0.910 0.937 0.954 0.963 0.966 0.967
6.0 0.828 0.890 0.920 0.947 0.963 0.970 0.973 0.975
6.5 0.836 0.898 0.929 0.955 0.970 0.977 0.979 0.980
7.0 0.843 0.906 0.937 0.961 0.975 0.981 0.984 0.985
7.5 0.849 0.913 0.943 0.967 0.980 0.985 0.987 0.988
8.0 0.855 0.9\9 0.949 0.972 0.983 0.988 0.990 0.991
8.5 0.860 0.924 0.954 0.976 0.986 0.991 0.992 0.993
9.0 0.864 0.929 0.958 0.979 0.989 0.992 0.994 0.994
9.5 0.868 0.934 0.962 0.982 0.991 0.994 0.995 0.996
10.0 0.872 0.937 0.965 0.984 0.992 0.995 0.996 0.997
Fig. 2-13 Heat transfer effectiveness of straight and circular fins .
.8
5f--+--+-
62
.2 .4 .6
I
I
1.0
m (r. -'j)
(mil
1.4 1.6
<,r-::::t"---- r----.r----.
19 2.0 2.2 2.4

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 63
Fig. 2-14 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of
number of transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; coun￾terflow exchanger.
Cmin/Cmo.:p -
1/0.25
---
r￾O.sq~ -
l-v:V~
V
V
1.00
V
VIf
/.
" fII
°
uJ
60
....
z
i=
Ll
!t2 ....
100
80
°
I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu =AU/Cmin
Fig. 2-15 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of
number of tranfer units and capacity-rate ratio; parallel￾flow exchanger.
ZHEAT TRANSFER :;
SURFACE
tt8
0
I I I J---
I--
r---- Cm;n/Cmo• .;;O
0
/
/
"" 0.25-
,., V/
--
0.50
!JV:::V
0.75
VI#-V
I-"" 1.00
0
IV
o II
II
0o I 234 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu =AU/Cmin
10
l&l
Z
l&l
l￾o
l&l
lL
:t2
...

Fig. 2-16 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of num￾ber of transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; crossflow ex￾changer with fluids unmixed.
80 1--__--'__ 1+
LV
1Il 60
1Il
w
z
w I
> 40 t￾l￾o I
w -I
u,
-1
u, 20 w
+----
00 I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu = AU/Cmin
Fig. 2-17 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of num￾ber of transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; crossflow ex￾changer with one fluid mixed.
I
•
.,.MIXED
FLUID
80
w
1Il 60 ~+-~4<4~-=tF:l;=:t=t:=:--j
1Il
w
Z
w
> 40I----1IIIH-·_+_---+--+--+--I----1----_+_-1
I￾o
W
u,
20 f-l'-+--\-----i---l_
00 I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu =AU/Cmin
64

Fig. 2-18 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of
number of transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; crossflow
exchanger with both fluids mixed.
100
.:
Vl
Vl
W
Z
W
t￾U
W
u,
u,
w
80
60
40
20
I)---MIXED FLUID
FLUID
Cmin/Cma'1.. =
r
t-
/../" 0.4
/~v~
0 V
0.8
t:::- 1.0
-
;II
f
1/
o
o 1 234 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu =AU/C min
Fig. 2-19 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of
number of transfer units and number of passes; multipass
cross-counterflow exchanger. Cmt.fCmax = I; unmixed
flow within passes, both fluids mixed between passes.
r--- -----<---- ----...
..::.+.. ,.A:;·..
I : '
: I :
, : :
4- PASS--......
---
1.--1-
COUNTERFLOW- ty
,-~
I--+-- -- (0"00) .d p..: 3-PllSS V
/P. /,-,- PASS
;}'/
1/
A
f
90
80
400 I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu = AU/C min
w 70
lJ)
lJ)
I&l
Z
60
t￾o
w
... 50 It
65

O'l
O'l
Fig. 2-20 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of
number of transfer units and number of passes; multi￾pass cross-counterflow exchanger, Cmin/Cm.. = 1;
unmixed flow within passes, one fluid unmixed between
passes.
Fig. 2-21 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of
number of transfer units and number of passes; multi￾pass cross-counterflow exchanger, Cmin/Cmax = 1;
unmixed flow within passes, both fluids unmixed be￾tween passes .
---,
-:- /?"\~_
I I I
, ' J I I I
.... '" '~t'/
j' ,
.
I I I I
'I
/
'..::'r/........ '~.r;/
j' I 2 3
4
5
tOUN1TER1FLOW
-
V- I
t> --:::::: -:::
l% t:-,.-- I
vV"' 3-PASS
v-<-I-- 2-PASS I
II I-I-PASS I
If!
t
II
NUMBER OF TRANSFER UNITS. N tu =AU/C m io
50
70
40
o
80
60
90
".
",'
V1
V1 WZW>
>- uW
u,
u, W
,.--
.,- I
(n=_)_
- r>- :.-
C/"
---
V I V K 3-PASS
I~
!7-I-- 2-PASS I
/;,V--I-I-PASS I
II h
II
70
60
50
40
o 1 2 3 4 5
NUMBER OF TRANSFER UNITS, Nt u =AU/Cm lO
".
80
90
'"V1
V1 WZW>
i=uW
u,
u, W

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 67
Fig.2-22 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of counterflow number
of transfer units and crossflow number of transfer units; counterflow
exchanger with crossflow headers.
COUNTERFLOW CROSSFLOW
I I
Cmln/Cmax = 1
_5- - -- I--- V .....,..... V
I--- -
-:V
,..0'"V Ntu (CROSSF LOW)
/ V
/
/
/
/
I
80
'00
20
°°
2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu = AU/Cm',n (COUNTERFLOW)
<II.
",'
60
UJ
z
UJ
>
i=
40
u,
u,
UJ

C1l
00
"V
f--
II~
f-- Cmin/Cmfl1l cO
8
025____
I. ......
V~75_
6" ...... 1.00
I---
I
40 ,.
I
20 II
II
0
I 2 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu =AU/Cmin
SHELL FLUID :n
±If::·:~:.:"'''ij»
TWO SHELL PASSES =
4, 8, 12••••• TUBE PASSES
III
III
LLJ
Z
LLJ
I￾o
ILl
II...
II...
ILl
Fig.2-24 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number of
transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; 2-4 multipass counter￾flow exchanger.
I I I 1-1--1- I
I----f--- Cmin /CIIl<II=0 I
.-l- I I
I
Iit%: v l
.
a o
J
I
I
r
f
II
C I
"7 - j
FLUID
00 I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu = AU/Cmin
100
TUBE FLUID
ONE SHELL PASS
2,4,6, •• " TUBE PASSES
80
II.)
Fig. 2-23 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number of
transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; 1- 2 parallel-counterllow
exchanger.
III 60
III
loJ
Z
ILl
40
I￾o
ILl
II... It 20

Fig.2-25 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; 3-6 multipass coun￾terflow exchanger.
Fig. 2-26 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units and capacity-rate ratio; 4-8 multipass coun￾ter1low exchanger.
,tv'
I I I L-[:::::I---
-
I---+-
t-- Cmin IC_ c:.... j.....-- l--J-=
/02~""'"
l--J--
Ar -- ~:,:f5<? /' I---J-- / 075 ___l--
60
~I.O
f--- i
40 i
,. I I I
II
II
00
2
4
5
'"
SHELL FLUID
I~-
"t~»
- TUBE FLUID t
FOUR SHELL PASSES
8, Ib, 24, • • ., TUBE PASSES
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu
=AU/Cmin
CIl
CIl WZw
I-oW
u,
u, w
SHELL FLUID --;1 ,t~:J§m!:Jt
UBE FLUID
THREE SHELL PASSES
6.12.18•••. , TUBE PASSES
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu
=AU/Cmin
I I I V 1:::=J--I-- l-J- I--- Cmin'Cmo.=0
/0.25
V
V- I--I--J￾1.--
)
jV:0.50
V
0.75 I--- J-- I
0-1.00
I---r
II
II
) I 2
4
I.U
°
60
801
100
CIl
CIl WZw 40 >
i=
(.) w
20
w
-0

70 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig.2-27 Heattransfereffectiveness asa functionof numberof
transferunitsandcapacity-rate ratio; split-flowexchanger, shell
fluid mixed.
UBE
LUID
SHELL FLUID
t MIXED Irl
r-' r
, I r , r
,
;11 I l 4 l
•
I
I I
I
I
l't '-_J \. _.A. J "-
"
t
I) T
F
I!I
100
80
0:'
Vl
Vl 60
lJJ
Z
lJJ
>
t￾u 40
lJJ
U.
U.
lJJ
20
Cm;n/Cmax =0 010
If/pr￾0040 ---
1/v .... 0.60 - - -r--
?
»: 0.80 -- -1---
1.00 - -
CShell=Cmin --- _
Ctube=Cmin -----
o
o 2 4 6 8 10
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu =AU/Cmin
Fig.2-28 Heattransfereffectiveness asa functionof numberof
transfer units; effect of flow arrangement for Cmt.ICma:< = 1.
1;':--- PARALLEL FLOW \
r PARALLEL - COUNTER- "
FLOW I SHELL PAS~
I
II
00 I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu = AU/Cmin

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 71
Fig. 2-29 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units; multipass counterflow exchanger (parallel￾counterflow passes); effect of number of shell passes for
Cmin/Cmax = 1.
80
u.l
60
III
III
UJ
40
>
o
UJ I u, 20 /
u,
UJ
II
COUNTER FLOW
..--::b ...... 4 PASSES
I I 3 PASSES
~ PASSES (1-2
00 I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu'" AU/Cmin
Fig. 2-30 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units; effect of CmIn / Cmax .
COUNTERFLOW
-- .:.::
- Cm"/Cmu·1.0 _s --
:;.::.-I- Cm"/Cmu
-- -=-
;::.;
i"', ... CROSS-FLOW -,-
Wv- I'---- <, BOTH FLUIDS UNMIllED
Cm"/Cm" -09 f--
I
Cmin/Cmax * 1.0
I
I
/
II
80
100
00 I 2 3 4 5
NO. OF TRANSFER UNITS, Ntu '" AU/Cmin
'-l
III 60
III
UJ
z
i=
eu,
u, 20
UJ

Fig. 2-31 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic-flow
exchanger performance for Gmin/Gmu. = 1.
i I
I I
2 4 6 8 10
J&:::: t:::
1.# V
........
[kf'k
l--
Ai7 V G: C,/Cmon =1.0
WV -,"" <,I'1.S
r- 2.0
!Jr/ t--- t-- S.O
1/// 00
(COUNTER-FLOW) r/ 0.2S«hA)*<4
SO
o
70
60
80
"" 90
u:;'
100
<.Il
<.Il
lJJ
Z
lJJ
>
f￾U
lJJ
LL
LL
lJJ
MnDIFIED TRANSFER UNITS Ntu.o
Fig. 2-32 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic-flow
exchanger performance for Gmin/Gmu. = 0.95.
I I
I I
2 4 6 8 10
MODIFIED TRANSFER UNITS Ntu.o
r::::::- t:::=-L.--'"
-
:.--
V
Ih1'\><~-
W/ V
t-.
C,/Cm,n - I_I--
~1.S
//K t- I S.O
1// !" 00
(COUNTER-FLOW)
VI 0.2S«hA)*<4
SO
o
60
100
90
..,-
<.Il
80
z
lJJ
>
tJ 70
lJJ
LL
LL
lJJ
72

Fig.2-33 Heattransfereffectiveness asa functionof number
of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic-flow
exchangerperformance for Cmln/Cmu = 0.9.
l~TRlX
b:::: .;:::::::;e:
::::--: ::-
/
/
V
....- -
ItJ ) K'1'..-"'- C,/C m in =1.0 '-
/11/ l~ r-, ---loS
2.0
If
00
n (COUNTER -FLOW)
0.2S«hA)*< 4
100
;/<. 90
r.:;-
If)
If) 80 uJ
z
uJ
:::
f￾u 70
uJ
LL.
LL.
uJ
60
SO
o 2 4 6 8 10
MODIFIED TRANSFER UNITS Ntu. o
Fig.2-34 Heattransfereffectiveness as a functionof number
of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic-flow
exchanger performance for Cmln/Cmu = 0.8.
I I
I I
73
2 4 6 8 10
MODIFIED TRANSFER UNITS Nt u. o
i-=
e:l::::j:::::::
V
V
L>l--
......
/;V ,)f/\ r\
W'/ \ -,-: C,/C min =1.0
III 1""- <, loS
'-2.0
'(...,'---.
-
--S.O
00
(COUNTER-FLOW)
0.2S«hA)*<4
60
SO
o
100
90
.s
If)
80
z
uJ
>
t; 70
uJ
LL.
LL.
uJ

Fig. 2-35 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic-flow
exchanger performance for Gmt.fGm"" = 0.7.
I I
I I
100 L.--...::
..,~ J..--
V t:::-V ...-
/ f/: V
-
I
I--'
rlh \L)(t\ [\
,VI V 1\ 1"--' e.tc.; =1.0
fI.V r-.1'--1.5
2.0
III I--- <;t-5.0 I-----..
rl <>0
(COUNTER-FLOW)
0.25«hA)*Z4
90
01)-
<fl
<fl
W
Z
W
I￾U
W
U.
U.
W
80
70
60
50
a 2 4 6 8 10
MODIFIED TRANSFER UNITS Ntu,o
Fig. 2-36 Heat transfer effectiveness as a function of number
of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic-flow
exchanger performance for Gmt.fGm"" = 0,5,
I I
I I
k::::=' l="~ I:-- t::=
V
K; -
J..--
V\ \ k
I---
W['yK '\ '\.
&I I'\.. I'\... 1'\..." C,/Cm;n =1.0 Uf r-,r-.1'-1.51
rt 2.0
1--1- 1-5,0
<>0
(COUNTER FLOW)
I 0.5«hA)*< 2
60
100
50
a 2 4 6 8 10
MODIFIED TRANSFER UNITS Ntu,o
<fl
80
z
w
>
t; 70
w
u,
u,
w
74

Fig. 2-37 Heat transfer ineffectiveness as a function of num￾ber of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic￾flow exchanger performance for emin/emU = 1.
Fig. 2-38 Heat transfer ineffectiveness as a function of num￾ber of transfer units and matrix capacity-rate ratio; periodic￾flow exchanger performance for emin/emu = 0.95.
20
10
-:
8
20 30 40 50 60 80 100
r-.
r-.
,I'-.. r-.
<, r--,
"'''-
I~ -, t-, <,
I"\.'\.. '\ <, c.tc.: t>..
'\~ -.
= 1.0-V- r-,
"\ ,,""
/ ___ 1.5
\~
.....-
2
K
l--
3
!I<--l-S
"\
\
f\ "- 00
V
1\ 1\ 1\
236541
10
;,e.
10
20
W
8
(f)
(f)
lJJ Z
lJJ >
I-U
lJJ
LL
LL
lJJ Z
::;
20 30 40 50 60 80 100 , ,
<,
I~l'
~'"
~"-'" I ......
'~
~"
'\J'\..'\ <, .11.......
1/ ""
r-,""" I"
C,/C m in
V >0.."" 1"'- '
r---oo
t<S:
K
5---
3-
r---2- <,
1"-I"r' 1.5-
C"'- 1.0-
1""- 1"- I'
l'\I"
J'\I' 1"-!'I' I 21
10
3654
to:>
(f)
(f)
lJJ Z
lJJ >
I-U
lJJ
LL
LL
lJJ Z
....
Ntu
•
o
Nt u
•
o
--l
<:Il

Fig. 2-39 Effect of longitudinal thermal conductivity on the performance of periodic-flow and
direct-transferexchangers, Cmin/Cmu = I, C,/Cmin> 5.
" "" <,
t-- I I
1'-"'-........... <, --t--. I
0
1.08
'-"'-
I'-.. <, A
"-L"'" 1'.. r--......
-, l'..."'" ..........t--
~"
<, r-t-I---f-.-- 0.04
1'---
-, r--..t---
I----t----r---.9~ r-,
t:::!'-
<,
r-, ..........
f', r-.. <,
1" r--Q.J08
<, <;
<, t-, I'-.... I
<, <, <, 0.004
"
<, 'k
A~O"'-
~.02
10
8
6
5
4
OJ
S
3
<Jl
<Jl
W
z 2 w
>
I￾U
W
lJ..
lJ..
W
1
0.8
0.6
0.5
10 20 30 40 50 60 80 100 200 300 400
20 30 40 50 60 80 100 200 300 400
<, ,............
<, <;
"-'- ........I'--
-,
'"'"
<, r-- ,,'\.-, <, - f----- A - 0.08
-,,'\..-,
<,
-,
"\\.-. r-,
<,
r-, .......r---,
'I---
r-.. -, --- 0.04
~""
-,
-
\\\
-,
\ 1\ \. <,
\ <,
\ \ K
1\ 0.004 I" r-;
A 0\ \ 1\.0.01 t"---Q.02 0.6
0.5
10
0.8
6
5
<Jl
<Jl
W
E5 2
>
I￾U
W
lJ..
lJ..
W
z 1.0
Fig. 2-40 Effect of longitudinal thermal conductivity on the performance of periodic-flow and
direct-transferexchangers; Cmin/Cmu = 0.95, C,/Cm1n> 5.
10
8
4
..... 3
76

Heat Exchanger Thermal and Pressure-Drop Design 77
Fig. 2-41 Ratio of Stanton number to friction factor for a number of illustrative cases.
1.0
0.70
0.50
0.30
- 0.20
M
N
cl:
en
0.10
0.07
0.05
0.03
-: 13.95 (perf.~
~- ( - L-- ,
., - .z> '/
.- f- r-.. -20.06(0)
- --I- "
- -
-I---
~L--<:(~ x, =2.0
(:y();CY- x, =1.0
'" v::v:.w SPHERE BED
I!
II
200 400 1,000
Re
10,000 40,000
Fig. 2-42 Header configurations. (a) Folded core; (b) parallel-flow; (c)
counterflow; (d) free-discharge.
-
(a)
-
-
P(x)-P; 01 ~_INLETHEADER _
6.Pma t rix
HEADER
o X = x/L 1
(b)
(continued)

Fig. 2-42 (continued)
Ai
-
-
Vm = constant
u
o
(y) f-x- Ao
PI,' _P, L::::-:: ~LET HEADER
F='~--5'~:ADER
o X = x/L
(c)
X = x/L
Vm =
PARALLEL-FLOW
INFINITE-BOX
EXIT HEADER -
P(xl = constant
I
I
I
IINLET
",'- P,
---------g;IT
o I
I
I Ai
-
Fig. 2-43 Crossflow and two-pass cross-counterflow related designs. (a) Sin￾gle-pass; (b) two-pass.
(a) SINGLE-PASS (B) TWO-PASS

3
The Transient Response
of Heat Exchangers
In a heat exchanger the outlet-fluid temperature response to a change in one of
the inlet-fluid temperatures is not instantaneous. The lag is influenced by the
thermal capacitances ofthe fluids and the solid wall, as well as the resistances to
heat transfer. The response behavior of gas-turbine-plant heat exchangers is of
particular interest to the designer of the fuel-control system, because the shaft
power output is influenced by the lag introduced by the exchangers. In process
plants and air-conditioning systems, as well as power plants, the transient
response of the heat exchangers is needed by the controls engineer.
SUMMARY OF SOLUTIONS
In Fig. 3-1, schematic descriptions are provided for both direct-transfer and
periodic-flow types of counterflow exchangers. The inputs to be considered are
step changes in either th,;n or te,in, and the transient response outputs are the
changes in te,out and th,out. The flow stream an~ matri~apacity rates Ce
, Ch, and Cr
are described, along with the capacitances Cw and C,;
Fig. 3·1 Schematic descriptions for the transient response of (a) direct-transfer and (b) periodic-flow types
of counterflow exchangers.
ROTATING
MATRIX
C, =( Mc·rpm·60l • Ie,
(a) (b)

80 Compact Heat Exchangers
Solutions for 16 transient-response problems are provided in papers by Cima
and London [1), London, et al. (2), London, et al. (3), Rizika (4), and Myers, et al.
(5). These 16 problems are described schematically in the five illustrations of
Fig. 3-2. Some of these sketches describe several problems; for instance, Fig.
3-2a serves for two direct-transfer-type exchanger problems and also for two
periodic-flow-type exchanger problems. A detailed description of each problem
is given in Table 3-1, Summary of Solutions.
Fig. 3-2 Descriptions of the problems under consideration in terms of input and
response. (a) Regenerators, direct-transfers, and periodic-flow types; (b), (c), (d),
intercoolers and precoolers; (e) the insulated duct.
= 1
/
/
/
/
1 {
tho out - </>(f)
o x * = xl L
(al
/.1
/ I
,o',o' I
/ I
/ I
d' /. I
II? ,o',o' I
'1>'- / I
\.'C' /' ,,/:::>
.> ~7 I
/' I
\.'('\ r
I
I
t, at 0=0 + I
-----i
t,atO=O-1
Cm in = 0
Cmax
t h, ou'= </>(0) INPUT
I STEP CHANGE IN t,
o x·
(bl

I
I
I
I
,./1 I
I I
: I
: --)1
__~- -- I --
0",0<>__ -- I
\tI'O\............. I
-- 1 RESPONSE f1--::' _....-- 1
I
_n.(O),r- __ -- 1
h, out - 'f' 17 l c: _
I I, = CONSTANT I
INPUT
at 8=0-
STEP
CHANGE
IN
t h, in
o x'
(el
---
R* =00, Cmm /C max =0
INPUT C, reduced to 0 at 8 = 0
_ -I I w
[
1
_---i}
3t - RESPONSE
- t, =j 1,=ep(8)
- --I
----------------1
I, =Iw at I (ALSOIw= ep(8)
[ atX' = 1)
o x*
(d)
t, INPUT Iwand RESPONSES
t, '''-I I
I
If at 8=0 I
STEP I
I
I
I
t , t , = ep(8)
CHANGE : I I
Iw= ep(8) IN 1 - -"1
- .J atX' = 1 t f, 1I1 I
--
.,,-
I
1
-- --
-~
I
--
Iwand I
I
at 8=0+, If at I
I I
[ I
I I
0 x*
(e)
81

82 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 3-1 Summary of Solutions
Independent parameters Figure refs. Literature
Partially (Prob. type)
references Solution Fixed restricted Unrestricted [Graph. results)
I Cm in = I C:> 100 O*,Ntu,O:,R* (Direct-transfer e;. Fig. 3-2a) 1,2,3,121
Cmax [Fig. 3-3)
x* = I
2 Gmin = 1 C:> 100 8*, Nt u , 0; (Direct-transfer e;, Fig. 3-2a) 3,121
emax {<R* <: 4 [Fig. 3-3)
x* = 0
11 Cmin = I > 100 N,u.o, OJ, R* (Periodic-flow e..• Fig. 3-2a) 3
emax [Figs. 3-4, 3-5]
x* = I
4
Cmin = 1 > 100 N,u.o, OJ (Periodic-flow e;, Fig. 3-2a) 3
email. -t <: R* <: 4 [Fig. 3-4)
x* = 0
2 <: <: 20
5
Croin = I O*,NlU'C: (Direct-transfer e;. Fig. 3-2a) I
e max [Fig. 3-3]
R* = I
01 = I
x* = I
6
Croin = 1 O*,N,u (Direct-transfer e;. Fig. 3-2a) I
emax [Fig. 3-3) C:=O
OJ = I
x* = I
7 Croin = 0 0* <: I Ntu , C:, R* (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2b) 2,4
email. [Fig. 3-6) x* =0
8
Cmin = 0
8*, «: C: (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2b) 2
Cmax [Fig. 3-7) R*=OO
x* =0
9
Cmin = 0 O*,N.u, R* (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2b) 2
emax [Fig. 3-7)
C:=O
x* =0
10 Cm in = 0 8*,Ntu , C: (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2b) 2
Cmax [Fig. 3-7)
R* =0
x* =0
II Gmin = 0 C:> 100 0*. »: (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2b) 5
emax [Fig. 3-8) R* = I
x* =0

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 83
Table 3-1 Summary of Solutions (continued)
12 em," =0 e*, C: (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2b) 5
emax [Fig. 3-9]
R* = 1
N<u=3
x* = 0
13 emin = 0 C:> 100 e-,R* (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2b) 5
email. [Fig. 3-10]
N,u= 3
x* = 0
14 Cmin = 0 e*, N,u' C:, R* (Direct-transfer Fig. 3-2c) 5
Cmax [Fig. 3-11] R* = 1
x* = 0
15 Cmin = 0 8*. Nt u • C: (Direct-transfer Fig. 3·2d) 2
Cm ax [Figs. 3-12, 3-13,3-14] R* = 00
x* = I
16 x* = 1 8*,NlU'C: (Insulated-duct Fig. 3-2e) 2,6
[Figs. 3-12, 3-13, 3-14, 3-15]
t A recent reference by Romie [12] presents finite-difference solutions which
eliminate the indicated constraints on Cm in / Cmax and Cw *.
Each of the problems is referenced to the appropriate sketch of Fig. 3-2 by
the notation "(Prob, type)" in the next to last column and to the graphical results
by the notation "[Graph. results)." The second and third columns describe the
fixed and partially restricted parameters, which in some degree characterize the
problem. The unrestricted parameters are given in the fourth column. These are
the independent coordinates ofthe graphs, presenting the transient response as
the dependent variable. Some of these solutions are purely analytical, namely
solutions 7 to 10 and 15 and 16 of Table 3-1. The others were derived either
from digital computer finite-difference calculations from the differential equa￾tions (solutions 3 and 4), or from experiments with an electromechanical analog
(solutions 1, 2, 5, and 6). Techniques of dimensional analysis were used to form
the nondimensional groupings used to correlate the results in a reasonably
compact graphical presentation.
Solutions 11 to 13, Figs. 3-8 to 3-10, were calculated from the set of
equations of Table 3-2, recommended by Myers et al. 15). These equations tie to
the exact solution of Rizika [2) at 8° = 1, matching both the magnitude ofej and
its time derivative. They represent an empirical extrapolation, the validity of
which has been well confirmed by the finite-difference solutions of the exact
differential equations [5).
Solution 14, Fig. 3-11, also comes from the Myers et al. paper. It is a quite
complete analytical solution, details of which are provided in the appendix of
Ref. 5. Unfortunately, functions of Bessel functions are required, making direct

84 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 3-2 Solution for Fig. 3.2b Response for ()* 5 1
[
a(IJo - I)] e*=I-Uexp --_--
J C:
U = 1 _ (I - e-Z[Ysinh (Z/Y) + cosh {Z/Y)j}
1 -re
Z N,u(1 + R*)(I + R* + C:)
2R*C:
[
4R*C* ]-1/' Y- 1- w
(I+R*+C:)'
2N'u(1 + R*)C:Ye-zsinh (Z/l')
a=
U(I + R* + C:)(I - e-N,")
Note: Solutions 11 to 13 of Table 3-1, Figs. 3-8 to 3-10, were prepared from this
equation set.
Source: Ref. 5.
calculations somewhat inconvenient to make, so the equation form of the solu￾tion is not reported here.
While 15 solutions apply to the two-fluid heat exchanger, the sixteenth is for
what might be described either as an insulated duct through which fluid is
flowing or as a porous cylinder or matrix with flow in the axial direction. The
transient response of the insulated duct may be ofdirect interest to the designer.
The response of the porous cylinder is of decided interest in heat transfer
research, as transient techniques are often used to establish the basic heat
transfer characteristics of compact matrix surfaces [6, 7]. The responses are
given for both the solid and the fluid temperatures, and also for the maximum
slope of the response curve. These results are given graphically in Figs. 3-12 to
3-15 and more accurately in Tables 3-3 and 3-4. Many of the screen- and
sphere-bed-matrix heat transfer characteristics reported in Chap. 7 were ob￾tained using the maximum slope solution of Fig. 3-15 and Table 3-4 with the
transient technique developed by Locke [6]. The tabular information for solu￾tion 16 was obtained from computer programs from several sources (Refs. 6, 8,
and 9).
THE NONDIMENSIONAL PARAMETERS
A key requirement in the use of Table 3-1 and the associated graphs is an
understanding of the significance of the nondimensional parameters employed.
Because the governing differential equation and boundary conditions are avail￾able [2], it is possible to formulate an adequate set of nondimensional parameters
by purely formal methods. In fact, many such sets may be formulated, each
being convertible to the others. The particular parameters selected for this
presentation are considered to have the following advantages: (1) They are
readily understandable and nameable; (2) many of them have already been used

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 85
to express the steady-state heat exchanger performance covered in Chap. 2; (3)
the independent parameters are readily controlled; that is, one may be varied
while the others are kept constant for analog or computer program experimen￾tation.
Direct-Transfer-Type Exchangers
The set of nondimensional parameters is as follows:
o 0 0 ""(N Cmin 0 R O C- O 0
0 0
0
)
ef,l' ef,2' ef = 'V tu s C
max' X, , w' d' (3-1)
where e}l, e}2' ej are the dependent outlet-fluid temperature responses to the
step input of one of the fluid inlet temperatures (see Fig. 3-2a to d).
Nt u = AU/Cmin = l/(Rc +Rh)Cminis the exchanger number ofheat transfer
units, as used in Chap. 2, a nondimensional expression of exchanger size.
Cmin/Cmax is the capacity-rate ratio ofthe two fluids, as used in Chap. 2. If
C, < Ch, the capacity-rate ratio is Cc/Ch; otherwise it is Ch/Cc'
X
O
expresses the position in the exchanger. For this consideration X
O
= 0
or 1, corresponding to the fluid outlet sections.
W = (R on unstepped side)/(R on stepped side) is the heat transfer
resistance ratio (see Fig. 3-1).
C: = Cw/Cmin is the wall-capacitance parameter.t
0;; = (Od for the Cmin fluid)/(Od for the Cmax fluid) is the dwell-time ratio or
exchanger residence-time ratio for the two fluids.
0
0
= O/(Od for the Cmin fluid) is the generalized time parameter.
In forming ej, the fluid-temperature change from the initial temperature is
normalized with respect to the ultimate change at time equals infinity. Thus ej is
zero at the initial instant and tends toward unity as time increases. e}l denotes
the response on leaving the exchanger of that fluid which had the step input
imposed on it at entrance to the exchanger; while e}2 denotes the response of the
other fluid on leaving the exchanger (see Fig. 3-2a). When it is obvious that the
response of only one ofthe fluids is of interest, the subscript 1 or 2 is omitted, as
in Fig. 3-2b to d.
It is to be noted that Nt u , Cmin/Cmax, X 0, and R
O
should all appear in a complete
solution for steady-state behavior. While X
O
and R
O
do not appear explicitly in
the Chap. 2 solutions, implicitly X
O
= 0 or 1, and R
O would enter if the heat
exchanger surface temperature was required.
For the solutions in hand, Cmin/Cmax is specialized to be either unity (solutions
1,2,5, and 6 of Table 3-1) or zero (solutions 7 to 15 of Table 3-1). Thus, with
X
O
= 0 or 1, Eq. (3-1) reduces to
e}l' e}2' ej = <I>(Nt u , W, C:, 0;;, 0
0
) (3-2)
Further reduction in the number of independent parameters is achieved either
by specification offixed magnitudes (for example, C: = 0, 0;; = 1, as in solution
f em'R = (COd) for the Cm ,. fluid.

(3-3)
86 Compact Heat Exchangers
6 of Table 3-1) or by partially restricting the range (for example, C:> 100,
t <: W <: 4, as in solution 2 of Table 3-1).
Periodic-Flow-Type Exchanger
This set of nondimensional parameters in a considerable degree parallels the set
just described for the direct-transfer exchanger:
o 0 <I>(N Gmin ° RO GO ()O ()r ()o) ef,l, ef,2 = tu.o sC' x, , " d» -()--, R
max d,min
where e}I' e}2 are the dependent fluid temperature responses to the step input
(see Fig. 3-2a). The instantaneous fluid temperature is the average over
the flow cross section at an instant.
Nt u•o = 1/1(Rc + Rh)Gm1nl is the modified number oftransfer units for the
exchanger (as used in Chap. 2), a nondimensional expression of ex￾changer size.
Gmin/Gmu is the capacity-rate ratio ofthe two fluids, as used in Chap. 2. If
c, < c.. Gmin/Gmu = c.tc;
X ° expresses the position in the exchanger. The magnitudes of x 0 = 0 and
1 are of primary interest as they correspond to the fluid outlet sections
(see Fig. 3-2a).
R° is Rc/Rhif the step input is on t h•in, or it is Rh/Rcif the step input is on
t
cln
• R0 is the heat transfer resistance ratio.
G; = Gr/Gmin is the rotor capacity-rate ratio (as used in Chap. 2) or the
matrix-switching capacity-rate ratio for a valved periodic-flow exchanger.
(See Fig. 2-6 for a description ofthe rotary and valved types of periodic￾flow exchangers.)
()j = (()d for the Gminfluid)/(()d for the Gmu fluid) is the dwell-time ratio, or
exchanger residence-time ratio for the two fluids.
()r/()d min = (rotor period)/(()d for the Gmin fluid) is the nondimensional
roto; period.
= ()/()r is the generalized time parameter.
As for the direct-type exchanger, e}1 and e}2 are normalized-fluid outlet
responses that have magnitudes of zero initially and tend toward unity for large
times. e}1 is the response of that fluid leaving the exchanger which had imposed
on it the step input on entering the exchanger, while ei.2 denotes the response of
the other fluid. (See Fig. 3-2a for an example in which the step input is imposed
on the hot fluid. The definitions, however, are general enough to apply to the
other situation, in which the step input is imposed on the cold fluid.)
Note that the dependent response ej and the independent parameters Ntu•
o
,
Gmin/Gmu, r ", RO, and ();; have their counterparts in Eq. (3-1) for the direct￾transfer-type exchanger. Further, the counterpart ofC: in Eq. (3-1) is matched
by the combination, from Eq. (3-3),
Gol= Cr =Co
r - r
()d.min c.,

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 87
The generalized time parameters fr ofEq. (3-1) and O~ ofEq. (3-3) are related
by
=! = O/ed.min= eo
Or er/Od.min Or/ed.min
All the independent parameters of Eq. (3-3), exclusive of the generalized
time e~, would appear in a complete steady-state solution for the periodic-flow
exchanger. The steady-state solutions of Chap. 2 do include x 0 = 1 or 0 implic￾itly and would include R0 if the solutions were complete enough to account for
matrix temperatures. Matrix-temperature envelopes are considered by
Mondt [10).
For periodic-flow-type exchanger solutions 3 and 4 of Table 3-1, Cmin /
Cmax = 1 and x0 = 0 or 1 are specified as fixed. Furthermore, e~ and er/ed.min turn
out to be not significant for
c; = (C;Or) > 100
°d.min
an imposed partial restriction on the solutions. Consequently, Eq. (3-3) is
reduced substantially to
(3-4)
Insulated Duct
For solutions 15 and 16 ofTable 3-1, the set of non dimensional parameters is as
follows:
(3-5)
where ej and e: are the flUid and wall temperature responses, respectively, at the
fluid outlet section.
Ntu = hA/C is the number ofheat transfer units. C: =Cw/C = Cw/COd
is the wall-capacitance parameter.
00 = e/ed
is the generalized time parameter.
As for the two-fluid exchangers ofthe direct-transfer and periodic-flow types,
ej and e: are normalized responses that have an initial magnitude of zero and
tend toward unity for large times.
These solutions apply to a porous cylindrical matrix heated or cooled by an
axial flow stream, as well as to an insulated duct. Usually the Ntu can be expected
to be less than unity for the insulated duct (Fig. 3-12) but may be quite large for
the porous matrix (Figs. 3-13 and 3-14).
Figure 3-15 provides the maximum slope of the ej curves of Fig. 3-14.
RESPONSE TO A FLOW-RATE CHANGE
To this point attention has been given to an outlet-fluid temperature response
due to an inlet-fluid temperature step input. Solution 15 (Fig. 3-2d) is an
c; = (C;Or) > 100
°d.min
c; = (C;Or) > 100
°d.min
c; = (C;Or) > 100
°d.min

88 Compact Heat Exchangers
exception. Here it is supposed that Gma.(~Gmin) is suddenly reduced to zero;
then the Gmlnoutlet temperature (at x 0 = 1) and the wall temperature (at x 0 = 1)
will have the same behavior as for an insulated duct or porous matrix (Figs. 3-12
to 3-14). This is an extreme example of a flow-rate change, and the lag is
substantial, being of the order
8g0 = + 1)8d
for a 90 percent response (from Fig. 3-14 and Nt u = 3). For a Gmin/Gmu = 1
exchanger, if both flow rates are changed simultaneously, it is equivalent to a
step change in Nt u • Note that Nt u increases with a reduction in flow. Under these
conditions, the wall temperatures do not change greatly, and the lag ofthe fluid
outlet temperatures is shown to be small [1], of the order
8go =(Jd
Generally, the lag due to a flow-rate change is substantially smaller than the lag
due to the accompanying inlet-fluid temperature changes.
RESPONSE TO AN ARBITRARY INPUT OR
A PERIODIC INPUT
The governing differential equations for both direct-transfer and periodic-flow
types of regenerators are linear, at least within the usual idealizations [2).
Consequently, an extension of the ej results to other than a step input can be
accomplished readily by a standard technique known as Duhamel's method; this
procedure is illustrated in Ref. 2. The controls engineer may be interested in the
frequency response, the amplitude and phase angle ofthe outlet response due to
a fixed-frequency-sine-wave periodic input. This information as a function of
frequency can be extracted from the transient responses reported here by
several standard techniques [11).
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
In Table 3-5, a 75 percent effective direct-transfer regenerator is compared to a
91 percent effective periodic-flow-type unit. These design effectivenesses are
considered to be typical in practical gas-turbine-plant applications.
It is worth noting that the ei.l response is of lesser importance than ei.2 for
high-effectiveness exchangers, as the temperature change associated with ei.l is
proportional to the steady-state ineffectiveness (1 - e) and is much smaller in
magnitude than the temperature change associated with ei.2, which is propor￾tional to the steady-state effectiveness e.
REFERENCES
1. Cima, R. M., and A. L. London: The Transient Response of a Two-Fluid Counterflow
Heat Exchanger-The Gas Turbine Regenerator, Trans. ASME, vol. 80, p. 1169,
1958.

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 89
2. London, A. L., F. R. Biancardi, and J. W. Mitchell: The Transient Response of Gas
Turbine Plant Heat Exchangers-Regenerators, Intercoolers, Precoolers, and Duct￾ing, Trans. ASME, vol. 81, p. 433, 1959.
3. London, A. L., D. F. Sampsell, and J. G. McGowan: The Transient Response of Gas
Turbine Plant Heat Exchangers- Additional Solutions for Regenerators of the Peri￾odic-Flow and Direct-Transfer Types, Trans. ASME, vol. 86, p. 127, 1964.
4. Rizika, J. W.: Thermal Lags in Flowing Incompressible Fluid Systems Containing Heat
Capacitors, Trans. ASME, vol. 78, p. 1407, 1956.
5. Myers, G. E., J. W. Mitchell, and C. F. Lindeman, Jr.: The Transient Response of Heat
Exchangers Having an Infinite Capacitance Rate Fluid, Trans. ASME, vol. 92, pp.
269-275,1970.
6. Locke, G. L.: Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of Porous Solids,
Stanford University Technical Report 10, prepared under contract N6-onr-251 Task
Order 6 for the Office of Naval Research, June 1, 1950.
7. Coppage, J. E., and A. L. London: Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of
Porous Media, Chern. Eng. Prog., vol. 52, no. 2, 1956.
8. Vickers, P., and F. A. Creswick: General Motors Tech. Center, private communica￾tion, July, 1958.
9. Howard, C. P.: U.S. Navy Post Graduate School, Monterey, Cal., private communica￾tion, September, 1962.
10. Mondt, J. R.: Vehicular Gas Turbine Periodic-Flow Heat Exchanger Solid and Fluid
Temperature Distributions, Trans. ASME, vol. 86, p. 121, 1964.
11. Raven, F. H.: "Automatic Control Engineering," pp. 345-347, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York, 1961.
12. Romie, F. E.: "Transient Response of the Counterflow Heat Exchanger," Trans.
ASME, vol. 106, 1984.

(&:J
o Table 3-3 Insulated Ductor Porous MatrixSolution
wsn temperature response Fluid temperature response t:{
Ntux* Ntux*
r t r
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.819 0.670 0.549 0.449 0.368 0.301 0.247 0.202 0.165 0.135
0.5 0.337 0.289 0.247 0.211 0.181 0.154 0.132 0.112 0.096 0.062 0.5 0.885 0.781 0.688 0604 0.530 0.464 0.406 0.354 0.309 0.369
1.0 0.562 0.499 0.442 0.391 0.346 0.305 0.269 0.237 0.208 0.183 1.0 0.927 0.855 0.785 0.718 0.654 0.594 0.539 0.487 0.439 0.394
1.5 0.712 0.650 0.592 0.538 0.488 0.441 0.399 0.359 0.323 0.290 1.5 0.953 0.904 0.852 0.800 0.748 0.696 0.646 0.597 0.551 0.506
2.0 0.811 0.757 0.705 0.654 0.606 0.559 0.515 0.473 0.433 0.397 2.0 0.970 0.936 0.899 0.859 0.817 0.775 0.731 0.688 0.645 0.604
2.5 0.876 0.833 0.789 0.744 0.700 0.657 0.615 0.574 0.534 0.496 2.5 0.981 0.958 0.931 0.901 0869 0.834 0.798 0.761 0.723 0.685
3.0 0.919 0.885 0.850 0.813 0.775 0.737 0.698 0.660 0.622 0.5a5 3.0 0.988 0.972 0.953 0.931 0.906 0.879 0.849 0.818 0.786 0.753
3.5 0.947 0.922 0.894 0.864 0.833 0.800 0.766 0.732 0.698 0.663 3.5 0992 0.982 0.968 0.952 0.933 0.912 0.889 0.863 0.836 0.808
4.0 0.966 0.947 0.926 0.902 0.877 0.850 0.821 0.791 0.761 0.730 4.0 0.995 0.988 0.979 0.967 0.953 0.936 0.918 0.898 0.876 0.852
4.5 0.978 0.964 0.948 0.930 0.910 0.888 0.864 0.839 0.813 0.786 4.5 0.997 0.992 0.986 0.977 0.967 0.954 0.940 0.924 0.906 0.887
5.0 0.986 0.976 0.964 0.950 0.934 0.917 0.898 0.877 0.855 0.831 5.0 0.998 0.995 0.990 0.984 0.977 0.967 0.956 0.944 0.930 0.914
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
I 0.346 0.183 0.094 0.047 0.023 0.011 0.005 0.003 0.001 0.001 0 0.368 0.135 0.050 0.018 0.007 0.002 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.000
2 0.606 0.397 0.247 0.148 0.086 0.049 0.027 0.015 0.008 0.004 I 0.654 0.394 0.225 0.123 0.066 0.034 om 7 0.009 0.004 0.002
3 0.775 0.585 0.417 0283 0.185 0.118 0.072 0.043 0.026 0.015 2 0.817 0.604 0.415 0.270 0.169 0.102 0.060 0.034 0.019 0.011
4 0.877 0.730 0.573 0.428 0.307 0.213 0.142 0.093 0.059 0.037 3 0.906 0.753 0.583 0.427 0.298 0.201 0.131 0.082 0.051 0.031
5 0.934 0.831 0.702 0.565 0.436 0.325 0.234 0.163 0.112 0.074 4 0.953 0.852 0.717 0.572 0.435 0.319 0.225 0.153 0.103 0.066
6 0.966 0.898 0.800 0.682 0.559 0.442 0.338 0.251 0.181 0.128 5 0.977 0.914 0.815 0.693 0.564 0.441 0.333 0.243 0.174 0.120
7 0.983 0940 0.870 0.776 0.667 0.555 0.447 0.349 0.266 0.197 6 0.989 0.951 0.883 0.788 0.676 0.558 0.446 0.344 0.260 0.190
8 0.991 0.966 0.918 0.847 0.757 0656 0.551 0.450 0.358 0.278 7 0.995 0.973 0.928 0.857 0.766 0.662 0.554 0.449 0.355 0.273
9 0.996 0.981 0.949 0.898 0.827 0.741 0.646 0.548 0.453 0.366 8 0.997 0.985 0.957 0.907 0.837 0.749 0.652 0.550 0.453 0.363
10 0.998 0.989 0.969 0.934 0.880 0.811 0.728 0.638 0.545 0.455 9 0.999 0.992 0.974 0.941 0.888 0.819 0.735 0.643 0.548 0.455
II 0.958 0.919 0.865 0.796 0.717 0.631 0.543 10 0.999 0.996 0.985 0.963 0.926 0.872 0.804 0.723 0.635 0.546
12 0.974 0.946 0.905 0.851 0.784 0.708 0.625 11 0.977 0.951 0.912 0.858 0.790 0.713 0.629
13 0.984 0.965 0.935 0.893 0.838 0.773 0.699 12 0.986 0.969 0.940 0.899 0.844 0.778 0.704

14 0.990 0.978 0.956 0.925 0.881 0.827 0.763 13 0.992 0.980 0.960 0.930 0.887 0.833 0.768
15 0.994 0.986 0.971 0.948 0.915 0.871 0.817 14 0.995 0.988 0.974 0.952 0.919 0.876 0.822
16 0.997 0.991 0.981 0.965 0.940 0.905 0.861 15 0.997 0.993 0.983 0.968 0.943 0.910 0.866
17 0.998 0.995 0.988 0.976 0.958 0.932 0.896 16 0.998 0.996 0.989 0.979 0.961 0.935 0.901
18 0.999 0.997 0.992 0.984 0.971 0.951 0.924 17 0.999 0.997 0.993 0.986 0.973 0.954 0.927
19 0.999 0.998 0.995 0.990 0.980 0.966 0.945 18 0.998 0.996 0.991 0.982 0.968 0.948
19 0.999 0.998 0.994 0.988 0.978 0.963
12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
2 0.001 0000 0.000 0 0.000 0.000
4 0.014 0.005 0.002 0.000 0.000 0.000 2 0.003 0.001 0.000 0.000
6 0.060 0.026 0.011 0004 0.002 0.001 0.000 4 0.026 0.010 0.003 0.001 0.000 0.000
8 0.155 0.081 0.039 0.018 0.006 0.003 0.001 0.000 0.000 6 0095 0.044 0.019 0.008 0.003 0.001 0.000 0.000
10 0.297 0.178 0.099 0.052 0.026 0.012 0.005 0.002 0.001 0.000 8 0.216 0.118 0.060 0.029 0.013 0.006 0.002 0.001 0.000 0.000
12 0.459 0.312 0.196 0.116 0.065 0.034 0.017 0.008 0.004 0.002 10 0.375 0.237 0.139 0.076 0.039 0.019 0.009 0.004 0.002 0.001
14 0.616 0.462 0.324 0.212 0.131 0.077 0.043 0.023 0.012 0.006 12 0.541 0.384 0.254 0.156 0.091 0.050 0.026 0.013 0.006 0.003
16 0746 0.608 0.464 0.334 0.226 0.145 0.088 0.051 0.028 0.015 14 0.689 0.538 0.392 0.268 0.172 0.104 0.060 0.033 0.017 0.009
18 0.844 0.733 0.602 0.465 0.341 0.237 0.157 0.099 0.059 0.034 16 0.804 0.677 0.535 0.398 0.279 0.185 0.117 0.070 0.040 0.022
20 0909 0.828 0.721 0.597 0.467 0.350 0.248 . 0.169 0.109 0.067 18 0.884 0.788 0.667 0.535 0.403 0.289 0.197 0.128 0.079 0.047
22 0.950 0.896 0.815 0.709 0.591 0.469 0.355 0.257 0.178 0.118 20 0.935 0.869 0.774 0.659 0.533 0.408 0.298 0.208 0.138 0.088
24 0.974 0.940 0.883 0.803 0.700 0.587 0.473 0.362 0.265 0.187 22 0.966 0.923 0.855 0.762 0.651 0.531 0.412 0.306 0.218 0.148
26 0.987 0.967 0.930 0.872 0.792 0.694 0.583 0.472 0.367 0.273 24 0.983 0.957 0.912 0.843 0.752 0.645 0.531 0.415 0313 0.226
28 0.994 0.983 0.960 0.921 0.862 0.782 0.687 0.582 0.473 0.372 26 0.992 0.977 0.949 0.901 0.832 0.743 0.639 0.529 0.418 0.319
30 0.997 0.991 0.978 0.953 0.912 0.852 0.774 0.681 0.579 0.474 28 0.996 0.988 0.972 0.941 0.891 0.822 0.735 0.635 0.529 0.420
32 0.999 0.996 0.988 0.973 0.946 0.903 0.843 0.766 0.675 0.577 30 0.998 0.994 0.985 0.966 0.932 0882 0.813 0.727 0.630 0.527
34 0.998 0.994 0.985 0.968 0.939 0.895 0.834 0.758 0.670 32 0.999 0.997 0.992 0.981 0.960 0.925 0.873 0.804 0.721 0.626
36 0.999 0.997 0992 0.982 0.963 0.932 0.887 0.827 0.752 34 0.999 0.996 0.990 0.977 0.954 0.917 0.865 0.796 0.714
38 0.999 0.996 0.990 0.978 0.958 0.926 0.880 0.819 36 0.999 0.998 0.995 0.987 0.973 0.948 0.910 0.857 0.789
40 0.999 0.998 0.995 0.988 0.975 0.953 0.919 0.873 38 0.999 0.997 0.993 0.984 0.968 0.942 0.903 0.849
42 0.999 0.997 0.993 0.985 0.971 0.948 0.913 40 0.999 0.996 0.991 0.981 0.964 0.936 0.896
42 0.999 0998 0.995 0.989 0.978 0.959 0.931
t r* = (0* - x*)(Ntu/C,'t), x* = I at exit section.
-

92 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 3-4 Insulated Ductor Porous Matrix Solution
Ntu
Maximum Time at »; Maximum Time at
slope max slope slope max slope
1.0 0.368 0.000 8.0 0.840 0.806
1.25 0.448 0.000 8.5 0.863 0.817
1.5 0.502 0.000 9.0 0.885 0.828
1.75 0.532 0.000 9.5 0.907 0.837
2.0 0.541 0.000 10.0 0.929 0.846
2.5 0.553 0.271 15.0 1.121 0.898
3.0 0.577 0.424 20.0 1.284 0.924
3.5 0.604 0.521 25.0 1.432 0.940
4.0 0.632 0.590 30.0 1.564 0.950
4.5 0.660 0.640 40.0 1.797 0.963
5.0 0.688 0.680 50.0 2.009 0.970
5.5 0.715 0.711 60.0 2.196 0.974
6.0 0.741 0.737 70.0 2.371 0.977
6.5 0.767 0.758 80.0 2.533 0.981
7.0 0.792 0.776 90.0 2.683 0.984
7.5 0.816 0.792
hA L N =-=5/-
tu C r, [ de* ]
Maximum slope = d( O*~- I)
C~ max
Time at max slope = (-_-- 0*- 1) = (0*) =-
C! max slope C~ max slope
for 0* 1

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 93
Table3-5 Illustrative Examples of Gas-Turbine-Plant Regenerators
Direct￾transfer
Periodic￾How
Typical design conditions:
I. Steady-state effectiveness e, %
2. Number of transfer units N«. Ntu,o
3. Rotor capacity-rate ratio
4. Wall-capacitance ratio C:. C:
5. Resistance ratio R* (cold-to-hot sides)
6. Rotor period II" s
7. Dwell time for C" lid." S
Response time calculation:
I. 11*/C~ for eJ,. 0.90, from Fig. 3-3
2. IIVq for eJ,. = 0.90, from Fig. 3-4
11* (R*-I) .
3. -=- - 0.40 --- , from FIg. 3-3, for eJ" = 0.70
R*+l .
(R*-I) .
4. C:' _ 0.6 - 0.53 R* + I ' from FIg. 3-4, for eJ" = 0.70
(
R * - I)
5. 0.40 R* + I
(
R * - I)
6. 0.53 R* + I
7. tJ,. = o. resp':.nse times
11* C:<II* /C~)
II = IId.,II*, s
117/=q(II7//Cn
I~ 11,117/, s
8. -t. 0-.:.70 response times
II*/C;:'
II,s
IIV(C:' -0.6)
II,s
75 90.9
3.0 10.0
10.0
1,500 1,000
2/3 2
2
0.1 0.02
1.2
0.92
1.04
2.32
-0.08
0.18
1,800
mQ]
9.2
CIITJ
0.96
o.:m
2.50
D2J

Fig. 3-3 Transient response solutions 1, 2, 5, and 6 of Table 3-1.
e*/O.5+15w*)
3.0
o
0.6 *
tf,l
0.5
0.2
1.0
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.8
0.7
0.9
o
3.0
20
"'[*- e* 0.40
w R +1
10
1.0
I I 6 t-- 8--l I -
Nt" • 3, 4,
r
ie-
...---:
:- fjlz fY vv....:l><t;::: t>
/ /'" (/1VI .> t5<v p< -: t--../ I--- Ntu ".5
I. (/I 1/ 1/ / /
t'--4'~3
VI I /
r---6
Vj /
l- I
1/ / 1// I
y/ //V t
1/ VI'/ Cmin/Cmox= I
V
0.2
o
0.3
0.6
0.7
0.1
1.0 0
0.9
0.8
c* 0.5
C.f;2.
0.4
10
Fig. 3-4 Transient response solutions 3 and 4 of Table 3-1.
Ie:
20 30
1.0
0.9
0.1
0.8
0.7
0.6
en
0.5 '
0.4
0.3
0.2
o
2.0 3.0
rR* IJ [?+I
1.0
e: eft- 0.6 - 0.53
Ntuo"O"\ IIY 4
J
I
-r￾6....... 8 ....... P I Nt"o'IO _
4--..
..--- -- V V
---
-- -
i
Ntu
O'
4J>: V .-L.---
IiW :..-&..." Y
V
/
...-
,~-'~ )~
-: 8 y
'/ /----1./
/
V
/
10>,/
/ V / V
t / / / t"l* - •
VV/V I
/ / V V
,
Cmin/Cmox= I
-: V
I I
o
0.1
o
0.3
0.8
0.7
0.9
0.6
0.2
94

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 95
Fig.3-5 Transient response solution 3 of Table 3-1. Enlarged abscissa scale for ej,2 of Fig. 3-4.
-
:::::::::::::
Ntuo =10 ___ b:::E::::== r;..-r:---
-.-
8 ___
~
V
V V "'--6
/;V//"
~4
VIV
II! Cmin/Cmax= I
--
If
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
f,f,2 *
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
o
o 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
e* IC* R r
0.5 0.6 0.7

[(W + l)(W +1+CO)] Fig.3-6 Transient response solution 7 of Table 3-1: Z(r = OON,u Co 2Ro
W egg
W
egg = 1 - e-N
," . Thus, ej= <1>(0°, N,u'W, C;)
0.4 0.6 08 1 * " 2 4 6810
R OR Cw
02
CW·OR R·, 51 y--W /
'J7 7
17
Ii II
77 \
t-,
T7 / "fJ \
/7/ 'r 1/\ 1\
I--- VI Jl, / 1\ 1\
l f I
t;( f\
1IV
V r/ 7 I
f'\
7 2Jl I':: r-,
V
/ J'05 -. --7
.#I;:V
../V V /
--; /?-,
<,
/.V t::/' // /' f----2,25 t><'<,
t:::::::1:;::::/ v
V >
<,f-.- I-- '0- '--
=::,::;;.;;== - I-- I-
----- 000 to
01
17
14
, I
1.5
12
13
16
20 25 30 35
zeo
5 10 15
L--
~V- -
I----
f--- t-
/VY /
--
l.-
I/1/ -;/ / V
-----
i.->
III / /
III 1/ / .>:
II / / /
----
c::::======
7
/ /1/
'I / / »>
TJ/ »>-- L---
--
Cm,nIc mal ·0 - '-
,~=--
LIMITED TO 1
o
o
1.0
0.1
0.8
0.7
05
0.3
06
0.2
09
III .:f'04
*w
96

Fig. 3-7 Transient response solutions 8, 9, and 10 01Table 3-1.
00
--= -
V..,;:
Ntu' 3
'/'/
-:.:'/ /V 'l/ I
/ / Va"5V
//// 0/
Cmin;tmox' 0
1/1'bV . 1+ wl
IV;,; // (I) R' '00 and (I) R' '0 and
any e; any
//;W (2) and (2) and
v on)' R* any R'
[0
08
06
E*1
04
02
0
a 0.2 04 06 0.8 1.0
9* and I + I
12 1.4 1.6
Fig. 3-8 Transient response solution 11 01 Table 3-1, from the equation set 01
Table 3-2.
1.0
0.8
E; 0.6
0.4
0.2
.....-I---
--I￾Nt u - 3
./ »:V
/ V
-- / V /
....-
1/
/ /
/ VV
1/ / VO'
/ / I
I
/
/
/ / / Cmin/Cmax = a
I r. INFLUENCE OF Nt u
fj/ FOR RO = 1, Cwo 100
f/
0.2 0.4 0.8 1.0 1.2
97

r;,:;
Fig. 3-9 "D:.ansiel}!response solution 12 of Table 3-1, which demonstrates insen￾sitivity to C;;, for C;;, 5' 100.
Fig·l-10 Transient response solution 13 of Table 3-1. RO = 0 solution applies
for C;;, > 0 from Fig. 3-7.
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
o' -1
Cw
'
0.2 0.4
I-R* 5
.....- - -- /' V _...
j/ //
./
, I
,
/ V /R' 0 YTIC1ALl
I /
.:
Cm;n ICmax 0
I
V /
INFLUENCE OF R'
i
FORNtu~3,Cw'~10
I /
/ /
. / J
/
I
o
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.2
€; 0.6
0.8 1.0 1.2 0.6
O·-1
<:
0.2 0.4
I
/.
Cw~20 V
/,tl,'oo
i 1// Cm'n I Cma x 0
1v INFLUENCE OF CwO
I lt FOR 1, Ntu
ILL
1/ 1
•
000
00 .. - . . -
0.8
1.0
0.4
0.2
e; 0.6

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 99
Fig. 3-11 Transient response solution 14 of Table 3-1.
0
.>:::::- --
0.2
./
-
I-'""
, -
0.5 .Jh
-
I---
-- &'
J--..- /j
---
,;'
Nt u
5
,/'
./ / /I
...----:h 00
00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Fig. 3-12 Transient response solutions 15 and 16 of Table 3-1. See Table 3-3 for numerical
values.
10
08
E~
06
E*w
04
02
THE INSULATED DUCT-- LOW Nl u RANGE
FLUID, E:' AND WALL, E:' TEMP. RESPONSE
I -
:::::::::: r.,...- - / "'" " --
---
.... ..-
f- 04""-
N tu' 10 I.... ....
~O:~
/' 06/ I,.-
V'IO / /''' 04/
.... -
..-
-" / /
/
/' /1 -
I.--
/ /
/ /' 0'2 ........
V/ V .,;
,/ E*, ---
I:'v' /
f': ----
~<
i;'
°7
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
e*-I
Cw*

Fig. 3-13 Transient response solutions 15 and 16 of Table 3-1. See Table 3-3 for numerical
values.
10 15 20
9*-1
Cw
05
THE INSULATED DUCT --HIGH N tu RANGE
WALL TEMPERATURE RESPONSE.E:
N '.l 1/
I-- 30'- ,J 6- tu ... V V 3- '"
V V
.....
/ i> ;' ....... .... 2
/ V /'
./V
,..,
,..,
J_
-: V
V .....
1/".....
v -
r: ........
........ - V I---
/
30
:;::..V
/
.- o
o
02
08
04
1.0
0.6
E:
Fig. 3-14 Transient response solutions 15 and 16 of Table 3-1. See Table 3-3 for numerical
values.
10 15 20
9*-1
Cw*
05
THE INSULATED DUCT -- HIGH Ntu RANGE
FLUID TEMPERATURE RESPONSE, £;
VI 1" J---
Ntu· oo 100 30 V-l'c:.. ...... 6 1/ /
? ......--
...... ..-
I I Ldc￾l.-- IP'"
- v.....?f
Ntu. I
.
- -
........V /" ;1 ,....-
// ,-
.....
2 V // '/
/
v /3 /
/
/
,.." V 6 10 30 ;00 00
..,;" /
/ l..- V""" ,..
...... V
---
,/
0
0
10
08
02
04
06
E*f
100

The Transient Response of Heat Exchangers 101
Fig.3-15 Maximum slopeof thetransientresponse ejof solution16of Table3-1.SeeTable3-3for numerical
values.
TIME FOR MAXIMUM SLOPE
[(0' - l)(Cw'la. max slope
04 o 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 1 0 1 2 14 1 6 1 8 2.0 25
20
50
60
40
30 .£
70
90
80
10
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.82.0 2.5
, 1/ I
77 I
I
,f/ I
/
I
l
I
/
I
I
7
I
/
I
,
If I
TIME 1/ I
I t
I 1/
L~/ 1/ I II
J,/ I
/
/ II TIME 1/ /
/'
/
I
/' 1/ I
I
I
I
,
,
I I
I
, II! SLOPE
I
--- I
1/ SLOPE
V
I
I 1/
/ //
7
9
8
5
6
2
1
4
1.5
~6f'/d (8~:,1)1.x
FLUID TEMPERATURE RESPONSE, MAXIMUM SLOPE

4
The Effects of Ternperature-Dependent
FIuid Properties
In the application of basic heat transfer and flow-friction data to heat exchanger
design where temperature differences between the fluid and the surface are
large, consideration must be given to the fact that fluid-transport properties,
viscosity and thermal conductivity, and density may vary considerably with
temperature. Such property variations distort both velocity and temperature
profiles, and the question as to what temperature to use in evaluation ofthe fluid
properties immediately arises.
The variable-properties problems for gases and liquids differ substantially.
For gases, thermal conductivity, viscosity, and density all vary with temperature
to a considerable degree. On the other hand, the only liquid property that is
highly temperature dependent is viscosity, but viscosity typically varies more
with temperature than any of the gas properties. Because of these differences,
this chapter will be subdivided into a section on gases and a section on liquids. In
both cases, the concern will be with the effect of the temperature profile at a
particular flow cross section. In a final section of the chapter, the effect of the
variation of temperature in the direction of flow will be considered.
EFFECT OF GAS-PROPERTY VARIATIONS AT A
PARTICULAR FLOW SECTION
Property-variation effects at a particular flow cross section can usually be com￾pensated for by evaluating certain or all of the properties at some specified
reference temperature with respect to the wall and mixed mean fluid tempera￾tures (or freestream temperature in the case of external flows). For gases, while
such a scheme can generally be made to work, it often involves a certain
awkwardness when applied to internal flows, such as in a heat exchanger. In an
internal flow, one of the least ambiguous flow parameters is the mass velocity G.
It is the product of the mean velocity and mean density, Vp, but more impor￾tantly it is simply the mass flow rate divided by flow cross-sectional area W/Ac
•
In a gas flow where temperature is varying, the density varies everywhere and

The Effects of Temperature-Dependent Fluid Properties 103
the mean velocity then varies along the tube. But G is constant and unam￾biguously defined regardless of density variation, and it is thus very convenient
to use in defining the Reynolds number, 4rhGI/-l, and the Stanton number, hlGc p
•
However, temperature-dependent property-compensation schemes based on a
reference temperature generally require that G be broken up into its V and p
components so that p may be evaluated at the reference temperature. For an
internal flow, this really involves working with two different densities, for a
mean density must also be evaluated in order to evaluate the mean velocity from
the continuity equation. It is submitted that such a scheme is both awkward and
subject to ambiguous interpretations. Of course, for an external flow (flow over
an airfoil, for example), the possibility of ambiguity is greatly lessened because
the significant velocity is the free-stream velocity which is usually unambigu￾ously defined regardless of density variations in the boundary layer.
An alternative method of compensation, which is believed to be less subject
to ambiguities, is based on the fact that the pertinent gas properties vary in a
similar manner with absolute temperature for all gases. Thus all fluid properties
can be evaluated at the convenient mixed mean temperature, and the effects of
properties variation over the flow section can be expressed as a function of the
absolute temperature ratio TwiTm • Fortunately, both analysis and experiment
indicate that for most cases of interest the temperature-dependent-properties
effect at a given Re can be expressed as a simple power of TwiTm:
(4-1)t
(4-2)
where it is understood that all fluid properties are to be evaluated at the mixed
mean fluid temperature, and m and n are exponents that assume various magni￾tudes for different flow geometries and flow situations.
In Table 4-1, values of nand m are given for various situations, based on the
authors' interpretation of the available experimental data and analytic solutions.
These data are believed applicable for absolute temperature ratios up to about
3.0 or down to 0.33, and for absolute temperatures for which gas dissociation
and chemical reaction do not occur. The experiments cited were carried out
primarily with air, but enough included other gases to give some confidence in
the generality of the results.
It will be noted in Table 4-1 that only flow through circular tubes is included.
Information on flow through noncircular tubes is sketchy and incomplete, but it
is relatively certain that, for turbulent flow, tube geometry has little effect. For
laminar flow, tube shape probably has some effect, but in lieu of better data, it is
recommended that the circular-tube results be used. For the turbulent bound￾tSubscript m refers to the constant-property solution evaluated at the mixed mean fluid
temperature.
of TwiTm:
of TwiTm:
of TwiTm:
of TwiTm:

104 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 4-1 Exponents for (TwITm ), Gases
n m Ref. Basis
Laminar boundary layer on
flat plate:
Gas heating -0.01 -0.1 1 Analytic solution
Gas cooling 0 -0.05 1 Analytic solution
Flow normal to circular tube
or bank of circular tubes:
Gas heating 0.0 0.0 2 Heat transfer experiments
Gas cooling 0.0 0.0 2 Heat transfer experiments
Fully developed laminar flow
in circular tube:
Gas heating 0.0 1.0 3 Analytic solution
Gas cooling 0.0 1.0 3 Analytic solution
Fully developed turbulent flow
in circular tube:
Gas heating'] -0.5 ... 4 Experiments
-0.1 4 Experiments
Gas cooling 0.0 -0.1 4 Experiments
t Sleicher and Rouse [5] examined a large amount of experimental heat transfer data
for this case and recommended
(
T )1/4
n = - !oglO T: + 0.3
ary layer on an external surface, the behavior should differ very little from that
for turbulent flow inside a circular tube.
All properties in the experimental data presented in Chap. 10 have been
evaluated at the mixed mean temperature without a correction of the type
indicated here. Since the wall-to-fluid temperature differences in the experi￾ments were always moderately small, the indicated correction would in most
cases be negligible, but this would not necessarily be the case in application of
the data to large-temperature-difference heat exchangers.
It is to be noted that most of the test surfaces under consideration are of the
interrupted-fin variety, where the predominant mechanism is heat transfer
through a laminar boundary layer; for this geometry the temperature-depen￾dent-properties effect is very small, since m and n are close to zero. It is
therefore recommended that, for all the interrupted-boundary-layer surfaces,
properties should be evaluated at the mixed mean fluid temperature with no
additional correction for properties variation.
Property-variation effects become much more significant for flow through
long uninterrupted tubes. The necessary corrections, from Table 4-1, have been
incorporated in all the summaries oflong-tube behavior presented in Chapter 7.
If the analytic solutions in Chap. 6 are used for gas flow, these too should be
corrected by reference to Table 4-1.

The Effects of Temperature-Dependent Fluid Properties 105
EFFECT OF LIQUID-PROPERTY VARIATIONS AT A
PARTICULAR FLOW SECTION
The only property of importance that varies markedly with temperature for a
liquid is the viscosity. The two common methods of compensation of viscosity￾variation effects are the use of a reference temperature (the "film average"
temperature scheme), and the method of lumping the effects into a ratio of wall
to mean fluid viscosity (J1.w/J1.m), with the properties otherwise evaluated at the
mixed mean fluid temperature. The latter method will be employed here,
primarily because it is more consistent with the suggested procedure for han￾dling the temperature-dependent-properties problem for gases. Thus the cor￾rections take on the form
(4-3)
(4-4)
For laminar flow in a circular tube, calculations by Yang [6] for the thermal
entry region for both constant heat rate and constant surface temperature may
be very well correlated by n = -0.11 for a wide range of viscosity ratios.
Deissler [7]suggests -0.14 on the basis offully developed flowcalculations, and
this figure has been extensively used for many years to correlate experimental
data both for laminar flow in tubes and for flow normal to tubes. There are
evidently no definitive experiments on which to base a choice here, but in any
case, the difference is small and either figure is probably adequate for design
purposes. Deissler's analysis also yields data for the friction-factor exponent m.
The effect is rather substantial; m = 0.58 for liquid heating and 0.50 for liquid
cooling correlates the analysis satisfactorily. There is evidently little experimen￾tal confirmation of these results.
For turbulent flow in a circular tube Petukhov [8] has examined heat transfer
data covering these ranges: Pr, 2 to 140; Re, 5,000 to 123,000; and J1.w/J1.m,
0.025 to 12.5. He finds that the data are quite well correlated by
n = -0.25 (cooling)
n = -0.11 (heating)
Allen and Eckert [9] conducted experiments with water at Pr = 8 for the
Reynolds number range 13,000 to 111,000 for the heating case and found that
the friction coefficient results are reasonably correlated by
m = 0.25 (heating)
n =
n = n =
n =
n =
n = n =
n =
n =
n =
n =
n =
n =
n =
n = n =
n =

m = 0.25 (cooling)
(4-5)
106 Compact Heat Exchangers
Friction data for the cooling case appear to be scarce, but the very early data
ofRohonczy (10) for Re = 33,000 to 225,000, Pr = 1.3 to 5.8, andJ1w/J1m = 1 to
2 are quite well correlated by the same value of m, i.e.,
J1w>
J1m
EFFECT OF PROPERTY VARIATION IN THE FLOW
DIRECTION
In many applications, temperature (and thus property) variations along the tube
in the flow direction are more pronounced than those occurring over the flow
cross section. Analysis of typical cases for gases indicates that if the absolute
temperature variation is less than 2: 1 from one end ofthe flow tube to the other,
it is adequate to evaluate properties at a mean temperature with respect to
flow-tube length. This mean is then also the Tm used to correct for property
variation at a flow section, as discussed above. For greater temperature varia￾tions in the flow direction, it is probably desirable to consider the exchanger in
separate sections, in each of which the temperature variation is not excessive.
The evaluation of a correct mean temperature with respect to flow-tube
length often leads to some difficulty if very precise results are desired. Analysis
of the heat transfer performance of a heat exchanger is not so critical in this
respect as is the pressure drop, which is directly proportional to the mean fluid
density. In most cases, however, a reasonable estimate is satisfactory.
The simplest case is that of a counterflow heat exchanger with equal fluid
capacity rates; the mean fluid temperatures are merely the arithmetic averages
ofinflow and outflow temperatures. Where one fluid is at constant temperature,
as in an evaporator or condenser, or where one capacity rate is very much
greater than the other, the temperature variation ofthe other fluid will be close
to exponential, provided the heat transfer conductance does not vary markedly
with tube length. Denoting the constant temperature, entering fluid, and leav￾ing fluid temperatures as tconst , t.. and t«. respectively,
t 2
- t 1
t mean = tconsl -
lu
Where the heat transfer conductance decreases with tube length, as occurs
most importantly with laminar flow, the true mean temperature with respect to
tube length is nearer the fluid exit temperature, and the designer must exercise
judgment since exact analysis is very tedious.
The problem ofthe crossflow heat exchanger is much more complex, because
each flow tube behaves differently. However, the recommendations cited above
should be a satisfactory guide for most applications. At the very least, they will
provide an estimate of the importance of the variable-properties effects.

The Effects of Temperature-Dependent Fluid Properties 107
REFERENCES
1. Brown, W. B., and P. L. Donoughe: NACA (now NASA) TN 2379, Washington, D.C.,
September 1951.
2. Kays, W. M., and W. B. Nicoll: Laminar Flow Heat Transfer to a Gas with Large
Temperature Differences, Trans. ASME, vol. 85, ser. C, pp. 329-338, 1963.
3. Worsoe-Schmidt, P.M.: Finite-Difference Solution for Laminar Flow of Gas in a Tube
at High Heating Rate, Tech. Rpt. 247-8, Thermosciences Division, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, November 1964.
4. Kays, W. M., and M. E. Crawford: "Convective Heat and Mass Transfer," McGraw￾Hill Book Company, New York, 1980.
5. Sleicher, C. A., and M. W. Rouse: A Convenient Correlation for Heat Transfer to
Constant and Variable Property Fluids in Turbulent Pipe Flow, Int. ]. Heat and Mass
Transfer, vol. 18, pp. 677 -683, 1975.
6. Yang, K. T.: Laminar Forced Convection of Liquids in Tubes with Variable Viscosity,
]. Heat Transfer, vol. 84, pp. 353-362,1962.
7. Deissler, R. G.: Analytical Investigation of Fully Developed Laminar Flow in Tubes
with Heat Transfer with Fluid Properties Variable along the Radius, NACA (now
NASA) TN 2410, Washington, July 1951.
8. Petukhov, B. S.: Heat Transfer and Friction in Turbulent Pipe Flow with Variable
Physical Properties, in "Advances in Heat Transfer," vol. 6, Academic Press, New
York,pp. 503-564, 1970.
9. Allen, R. W., and E. R. C. Eckert: Friction and Heat-Transfer Measurements to
Turbulent Pipe Flow of Water (Pr = 7 and 8) at Uniform Wall Heat Flux, ]. Heat
Transfer, vol. 86, pp. 301-310, 1964.
10. Rohonczy, G.: Schweizer Arch., no. 5,1939.

5
Abrupt Contraction and Expansion
Pressure-Loss Coefficients
The typical installation of a compact heat exchanger usually involves a flow
contraction at the heat exchanger core entrance and a flow expansion at the core
exit. Often an abrupt (right-angle) contraction and expansion are used, and these
introduce additional flow-stream pressure drop. The designer is generally inter￾ested in the overall core pressure drop, including any entrance and exit loss,
rather than merely the core friction pressure drop. He or she thus must be able
to predict these additional losses.
This problem has been investigated both analytically and experimentally by
Kays [1). The present chapter is a briefsummary ofthe pertinent conclusions of
this reference and includes graphs of core entrance and exit pressure-loss
coefficients, K; and K., that can be used for heat exchanger design.
Figure 5-1 shows the entrance pressure drop and the exit pressure rise
characteristic of flow through a heat exchanger core. The entrance pressure
Fig. 5-1 Entrance pressure drop and exit pressure rise in a heat
exchanger core.
FLOW--+-

(5-2)
Abrupt Contraction and Expansion Pressure-Loss Coefficients 109
drop is made up of two parts which have been arbitrarily separated as follows:
The first is the pressure drop which would occur due to flow-area change alone,
without friction. The second is the pressure loss due to the irreversible free
expansion that always follows the abrupt contraction, which arises from bound￾ary-layer separation (as characterized by the vena contracta), and the conse￾quent pressure change due to change ofmomentum rate associated with changes
in velocity profile downstream from the vena contracta. Although the principal
applications under consideration here involve gas flow, density changes in the
usual case are sufficiently small that a constant-density treatment is satisfactory.
The entrance pressure drop can then be expressed as
f"P1 = (1 - a2) + K (5-1)
P 2gc
c 2gc
where Y is the velocity in the smaller tube (or tubes), i.e., inside the heat
exchanger core, and a is the core free-flow to frontal-area ratio. The irreversible
component of the pressure drop is contained in the abrupt contraction, or
entrance, coefficient Kc
•
The exit pressure rise is similarly broken into two parts. The first is the
pressure rise which would occur due to area change alone, without friction, and
is identical to the corresponding term in the entrance pressure drop. The second
is the pressure loss associated with the irreversible free expansion and momen￾tum changes following an abrupt expansion, and this term in the present case
subtracts from the other. Thus
f"P y2 y2
_2= _ (1 - a2 ) - K -
P 2gc
e 2gc
where K. is the abrupt expansion, or exit, coefficient.
K; and K. are functions of the contraction and expansion geometry and, in
some cases, of the Reynolds number in the tubes. The latter dependence arises
from the influence of the velocity profile in the tubes on the momentum rates
and from the resulting effect on the change of momentum at the entrance and
exit. These coefficients have been established analytically for a number ofsimple
entrance and exit geometries [1) and are presented graphically in Figs. 5-2 to
5-5. Sufficient experimental confirmation is contained in Ref. 1 to establish the
validity of the analysis at least to a precision adequate for the present applica￾tion.
The coefficients have been evaluated on the assumption of essentially uni￾form velocity in the large duct leading to the core, of uniform velocity in the
leaving duct, but of a fully established velocity profile in the small tubes of the
core. This assumption is generally justified in heat exchanger core analysis
because the Reynolds number in the core tubes is invariably many times smaller
than that in the entering and leaving ducts. It is only at low Reynolds numbers
that velocity profile has any appreciable influence. In applying the data, how￾ever, it should be remembered that the coefficients already include pressure
change associated with change of velocity profile. Thus the core friction factor
used in Eq. (2-22) to evaluate the overall pressure drop should be defined on the

110 Compact Heat Exchangers
basis of mean wall shear and not on the basis of overall pressure drop, as is
sometimes done. All the friction factors contained in this book are defined in this
manner, unless otherwise specified. This distinction becomes of particular im￾portance when evaluating pressure drop with laminar flow in the core tubes.
Since Figs. 5-2 to 5-5 cover only a few of the simplest geometries, the
designer must exercise judgment in the application of these results. In particu￾lar, the only case that is rigorously applicable to very short tubes is that of
circular tubes. The others have been worked out only for the case of tubes of
sufficient length so that there is an essentially fully established velocity profile at
the tube exit. A less than fully established velocity profile will result in entrance
coefficients K; that are lower, and exit coefficients K; that are higher, than those
obtained for the fully established condition. Interrupted-fin surfaces, and this
includes a large portion of the surfaces considered here, never have velocity
profiles that approach the fully established profiles oflong uninterrupted tubes,
because the very purpose of the fin interruption is to break up the profile, For
such surfaces with very frequent fin interruptions, the K; and K; curves for
Re = 00 should be used, and it will be noted that the Re = 00 curves in Figs. 5-3 to
5-5 are all identical. There will, of course, be interrupted-fin surfaces where a
partial profile is established, and the designer can only rely on his or her
judgment. However, it should be noted that the entrance and exit pressure
losses in heat exchangers using interrupted-fin surfaces do not contribute
greatly to the overall exchanger pressure drop, as is illustrated by the examples
of Appendix B. Thus the curves of Figs. 5-2 to 5-5 provide the designer with
estimates of entrance and exit pressure-drop data which are usually adequate for
design purposes.
For flow over banks of either bare or finned tubes, each tube row consists of a
contraction and an expansion, and the friction behavior of the first and last tube
rows in the core is not materially different from interior tube rows. Thus the
entrance and exit behavior is in effect already taken into consideration in the
core friction factors, and the entrance and exit loss coefficients K; and K, are then
zero. This consideration also applies to the matrix surfaces- sphere-bed,
crossed-rod, and woven-wire screens.
REFERENCES
1. Kays, W. M.: Loss Coefficients for Abrupt Changes in Flow Cross Section with Low
Reynolds Number Flow in Single and Multiple Tube Systems, Tech. Rept 9, Depart￾ment of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Jan. 1,1950; Trans. ASME, vol.
72,pp. 1067-1074, 1950.

Abrupt Contraction and Expansion Pressure-Loss Coefficients III
Fig. 5-2 Entrance and exit pressure-loss coefficients for a multiple-cir￾cular-tube heat exchanger core with abrupt-contraction entrance and
abrupt-expansion exit.
0000
000
1.3 0000
1.2- 4lLlDliRe _ 00
-0.20 h\ -0.10
~.
-0.05
-~ h'0:\
~- --
---"" - ::::;..-
\\ \\
~" --:ti\..""'\. 0.8 s; -- r---_ \
--
1--__
07
,~
-~
0.6 -- - Kc --
'\: -- 105__
TURBULENT
Re - 3,D9!1 --
f\\ - 5,000-
10.4_ =10,000-,
"
--
"
- - \\ 0.3 -
Do 0.2 '\;
0.1
0.0
"'"
r---:::-- - :7
Ke /
-0.1 TURBULENT V
--=
-0.2 Re·oo
~~
• 10,000 -,
-0.3 = 5,000
= 3,000 l..--./ r-,
-04 r---.
-0.5
-0.6 Ke
LAMINAR
4lL/Dl/Re - 0.05-1//1//
-0.7
I
-08 1 - 00
loo n:, oz
I
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 07 0.8 0.9 1.0
a

112 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig.5-3 Entrance and exit pressure-loss coefficients for a mUltiple-tube
flat-duct heat exchanger core with abrupt-contraction entrance and
abrupt-expansion exit.
2222//27222222272
1.3 ZZZ2ZZZ222222222
1.2
1.1
Io~:\
0.8- - -
10.7
-- - -
Kc >-
0.6 ",,,- R LAMINAR- ....
0.5- e= 2,000, ,
loA -~'
~-
__ 'O~O", '\ ,
,
-- J,
0.3 '" - -,
0.2
t'--.. '-,.... ,":..
."'.... ~:-.. -
, ....
0.1
<, .... .......
"r---. ~ t-- ,
0.0 "" r
f::::::>.-
-01 h-
-02 Ke
"'( ,.,/ /
-0.3 Re.: 10pOO{)<
2p00 ........... V--I----. -0.4 LAMINAR
-0.5
-0.6
-07
-0.8
0.00.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 07 o.8 os I.e
a

Abrupt Contraction and Expansion Pressure-Loss Coefficients 113
Fig. 5-4 Entrance and exit pressure-loss coefficients for a multiple￾square-tube heat exchanger core with abrupt-contraction entrance and
abrupt-expansion exit.
1.3
1.2 -- - -
- - 1.1 - ....--
- ---
Kc
/ V ....
08 -
LAMINAR
0.7 Re·2,OOO
iQ6_ 3,000
=-~ - -
,/ ~,5,OO
0.5 -.::::..:: I:i7; p-IO,OOO
b.4 --- ':;/- _ 00
"\ -~ ~2j
....
b3 ~-
........
.............
-
02 f\ I'---- --.J
~t'-.. .................
I' ......... :
0.1
....'..;;
"'l~l;J-t- .....-
0.0
-,
-0.1
0.2 I\. Re = iQ.000
-, s'P~
-0.3 r-, 3,000
-0.4
2,000 f-- <, LAMINAR
05 I'.. '"
<, \
06 "
-0.7 <,
-0.8
10.011.1 o.a 0:4 0:6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

114 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 5-5 Entrance and exit pressure-loss coefficients for a multiple-tri￾angular-tube heat exchanger core with abrupt-contraction entrance and
abrupt-expansion exit.
- -
1.2 ----
-
1.1 ---
---....
O.:~
....
/
0.8 \ Kc f
0.7 LAMINAR _
\" Re
~
~.6 f---
1-_- =- -=3~ -- 0.5 -- - l5 f--
1\ "'
1--:::-F-_~-
~'5 '00 0.4 --
0.3
\-
~-
-~
~,
\
i'--.- ....-- l} ~~
0.2 ........
\
..... ....;::;.::;
p.1 <, <,
\ < ---
<,
0.0 "-
.'\ -0.1 K. :::::.--
\ Re= >.&et: ~:-
-0.2 . 10, '.--... /' -...;;:::
-0.3 -,
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6 ""-
-0.7 r-,
<,
-os
10.0 CI 02 0 30.4050'E; 07 08 0 :9

6
Analytic Solutions
for Flow in Tubes
This chapter contains, in graphic and tabular form, a number of analytic solu￾tions (and two experimental correlations) for both laminar and turbulent flow
inside continuous tubes of various cross section - circular-, rectangular-, trian￾gular-, and concentric-circular-tube annuli. The validity of most of these solu￾tions has been adequately established experimentally, and thus where there is
overlap, there is no serious discrepancy between these data and the experimen￾tal data in Chap. 10. The data ofChap. 10 cover primarily complex geometrical
flow configurations for which a completely analytic treatment is impracticable.
For applications where long noninterrupted tubes are employed, it is suggested
that the reader investigate the solutions presented here before attempting to
find apropriate test data in Chap. 10. It should also be noted that the test data
presented in Chap. 10 are largely restricted to the Prandtl number range of
gases, whereas the analytic solutions presented here cover, with few exceptions,
the entire Prandtl number spectrum.
The solutions are presented in the following order:
1. Fully developed velocity and temperature profiles
a. Laminar flow, various geometries
b. Turbulent flow, circular-tube and concentric-circular-tube annuli
2. Thermal entry length, fully developed velocity profiles
a. Laminar flow, circular-tube, concentric-circular-tube annuli, rectan￾gular tubes
b. Turbulent flow, circular-tube
3. Combined thermal and hydrodynamic entry length laminar flow, circular￾tube
In all the solutions presented, the length dimension in the Nusselt number
and the Reynolds number is the hydraulic diameter, defined by Eq. (1-5).
In Fig. 6-1, Nusselt numbers and friction factors are presented for hydrody￾namically and thermally fully developed flow in a number of tubes of simple
geometry. The Nusselt numbers are presented for two heating conditions for

116 Compact Heat Exchangers
which a fully develoJ?..ed temperature profile is possible: constant heat rate per
unit of tube length (Jj), and constant surface temperature (D.t The triangular￾and rectangular-tube results are also restricted to a constant surface tempera￾ture around the heated tube periphery. Additionally, the solution of Reynolds
[1] is presented for a circular tube with constant heat rate per unit oftube length,
but with a cosine heat-flux variation around the periphery.
Figures 6-2 and 6-3 give the corresponding solutions for the complete family
of rectangular tubes [2). Again, temperature is always constant around the tube
periphery.
Figure 6-4 gives the fully developed laminar-flow friction factors for the
concentric-circular-tube annulus, where TO is the annulus radius ratio TI/To ,
inner radius over outer radius. In Fig. 6-5 the fully developed laminar-flow
constant-heat-rate Nusselt numbers for the annulus are presented for the inner
tube when the inner tube alone is heated, NUll, and for the outer tube when the
outer tube alone is heated, Nuoo [3). Also presented are influence coefficients Z/
and Zo, which may be used together with the one-surface-heated Nusselt num￾bers to calculate Nusselt numbers on both surfaces for any ratio of heat flux on
the two surfaces:
_ NUl.
Nu, - 1 _ (q;/q;')Z. (6-1)
Nuoo (
Nu, = 1 _ (q:'/q;)Zo 6-2)
The inner- and outer-tube Nusselt numbers are then related to the heat flux on
the two surfaces and the surface and fluid mixed mean temperatures as follows:
q;' = hl(t. - tm) (6-3)
q; = ho(to- tm ) (6-4)
Nu = hPh Nu = hoDh (6-5)
• k 0 k
t, is the temperature on the inner tube surface, tois the temperature on the outer
tube surface, and t; is the mixed mean fluid temperature. Heat flux is here
defined as positive inward to the fluid from the surfaces. Heat flux on either
surface may be either inward or outward, positive or negative. The relations and
results given hold whether the heat-flux ratio be positive or negative.
In Fig. 6-6 is plotted the Karrnan-Nikuradse equation (an experimental
correlation) for the friction factor for fully developed turbulent flow in a smooth
circular tube. Also shown are two simplified equations which may be used where
simplicity of an algebraic equation is desired. Turbulent-flow friction factors in
noncircular tubes that do not involve sharp corners with very acute angles differ
very little from the circular tube.
t These are not the only cases for which a fullydeveloped temperature profile is possible.

Analytic Solutions for Flow in Tubes 117
The complete, fully developed, turbulent flow heat transfer behavior for a
circular tube with constant heat rate per unit oftube length is shown in Fig. 6-7.
These results are based on experimental correlations suggested by Sleicher and
Rouse [4).
The ratio ofthe Nusselt number for constant heat rate to the Nusselt number
for constant surface temperature is plotted in Fig. 6-8 from the calculations of
Sleicher and Tribus [5). Note that for turbulent flow it is only at very low Prandtl
numbers that there is a significant difference.
Figure 6-9 is a plot ofthe fully developed, turbulent-flow, constant-heat-rate
Nusselt numbers for flow between parallel planes with one wall insulated [6).
The corresponding influence coefficients are given in Fig. 6-10. These data can
be used directly in Eq. (6-1) or (6-2) to calculate asymmetric heating.
Figures 6-11 to 6-13, from the calculations of Leung [6), give the complete,
fully developed, turbulent-flow, constant-heat-rate performance for a concen￾tric-circular-tube annulus with radius ratio 0.20. These results may be used in
Eqs. (6-1) and (6-2) to calculate asymmetric heating in the annulus for any
heat-flux ratio. Since the parallel planes and the circular tube (outer tube only)
are also members of the annulus family, sufficient results are presented to make
reasonable estimates by interpolation for any annulus radius ratio. To further
assist in interpolation, Figs. 6-14 and 6-15 are presented.
Figures 6-9 through 6-15 are the results of analytic solutions based on an
internally consistent set of turbulence model parameters. However, in the low
Prandtl number range « 0.03) a considerably higher value of turbulent Prandtl
number was employed than now seems reasonable. As a result the Nusselt
numbers in the low Prandtl number range are generally a few percent lower
than they in fact should be, and some inconsistency will be noted when compar￾ing these results with Fig. 6-7.
The solutions for thermal entry length, but with hydrodynamically fully
developed flow, start with Fig. 6-16. These solutions are all based on fluid
temperature uniform over the flow cross section at x = 0, the point where heat
transfer starts. Figure 6-16 gives the constant-surface-temperature results of
Sellars et al. [7). Both the local Nusselt number Nux and the mean Nusselt
number with respect to tube length NUm are plotted for laminar flow in a circular
tube.
In Fig. 6-17 the constant-heat-rate laminar-flow solutions for circular tubes
[8] and flow between parallel planes [3) are presented. The Nusselt number isthe
local Nusselt number, which is the only Nusselt number of any useful signifi￾cance in constant-heat-rate applications. The parallel planes results include the
influence coefficients so that asymmetric heating problems can be handled.
Again, Eqs. (6-1) and (6-2) are applicable.
The laminar-flow constant-heat-rate solutions for two annulus radius ratios,
from the analysis of Lundberg [3), are given in Fig. 6-18. Again, Eqs. (6-1) and
(6-2) are applicable.
Figure 6-19 gives the laminar-flow thermal-entry-length local Nusselt num￾bers for rectangular tubes with constant surface temperature, both axially and
peripherally. These results are based on numerical solutions discussed by Shah

118 Compact Heat Exchangers
and London [9] and are actually a composite ofmore than one analysis. These are
not "exact" solutions as the precision ofthe numerical methods used is not high.
Figures 6-20 to 6-22 show the calculated thermal-entry-length performance
for turbulent flow in a circular tube with constant heat rate per unit of tube
length. The Pr = 0.7,10.0 results are based on the analysis ofSparrow et al. [10),
while the Pr = 0.01 results are based on Kays and Nicoll [11]. The correspond￾ing results for constant surface temperature differ little from these.
Figure 6-23 shows the friction factors for the hydrodynamic entry length of a
circular tube, based on the analysis of Langhaar [12]. Velocity is assumed
uniform over the flow cross section at x = O.Three friction factors are plotted.j,
is the local friction factor, defined on the basis oflocal wall shear stress;fis the
mean friction factor from 0 to x, defined on the basis of mean shear stress over
the same length;japp is the apparent mean friction factor, defined on the basis of
total pressure drop from 0 to x, as follows:
- G2 x
!!.p= f. -- (6-6)
app 2g"p rh
This friction factor takes into consideration pressure drop due to increased axial
momentum flux accompanying the development ofthe velocity profile.f andjapp
can be evaluated from one another if the change of momentum flux can be
evaluated. A momentum-flux correction factor Kd
is plotted in Fig. 6-23 and can
be used to evaluate total momentum flux at any flow section; Kd
relates the
actual momentum flux to that which would be evaluated from the mean velocity.
G Momentum flow rate = Kd(AcG) - (6-7)
g"p
In Figs. 6-24 to 6-26 are plotted three laminar-flow heat transfer solutions for
combined hydrodynamic and thermal entry length for a circular tube, i.e., both
velocity and temperature uniform at x = O.The results in Figs. 6-24 and 6-25 are
for a constant surface temperature and are based on numerical solutions by
Hornbeck [13, 14]. Fig. 6-26 is for constant heat rate and is based on the results
of Heaton [15].
Calculations have been made for the combined hydrodynamic and thermal
entry length for turbulent flow in a tube. However, it is the opinion of the
authors that such solutions are of very limited utility and can be positively
misleading. If a tube has a nozzle entrance, a laminar boundary layer will tend to
develop, followed by a transition to turbulent flow with entirely different heat
transfer characteristics than would be the case when a turbulent boundary layer
develops from the tube entrance, as is assumed in all such analyses. Ifthe tube
has a square or other sharp-cornered entrance which causes boundary-layer
separation at the entrance, the turbulence generated causes much greater heat
transfer rates in the entry region than would be calculated on the basis of a
developing turbulent boundary layer. In Chap. 7, performance curves based on
experimental data are presented for several types of tubes with sharp-cornered
entrances, and these are believed to be much more useful and accurate for heat
exchanger design than the available analytic solutions.

Analytic Solutions for Flow in Tubes 119
REFERENCES
1. Reynolds, W. C.: Heat Transfer to Fully Developed Laminar Flow in a Circular Tube
with Arbitrary Circumferential Heat Flux, Trans. ASME, vol. 82, ser. C., p. 108, 1960.
2. Kays, W. M., and M. E. Crawford: "Convective Heat and Mass Transfer," McGraw￾Hill Book Company, New York, 1980.
3. Lundberg, R E., W. C. Reynolds, and W. M. Kays: NASA TN D-1972, Washington,
August 1963.
4. Sieicher, C. A., and M. W. Rouse: A Convenient Correlation for Heat Transfer to
Constant and Variable Property Fluids in Turbulent Pipe Flow, Int. I Heat Mass
Transfer, vol. 18, pp. 677-683, 1975.
5. Sieicher, C. A., and M. Tribus: "Heat Transfer in a Pipe with Turbulent Flow and
Arbitrary Wall-Temperature Distribution," pp. 59 -78, Heat Transfer and Fluid
Mechanics Institute, 1956.
6. Leung, E. Y., W. C. Reynolds, and W. M. Kays: Heat Transfer with Turbulent Flow in
Concentric and Eccentric Annuli with Constant and Variable Heat Flux, Rept. AHT-4,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Apr. 15, 1962.
7. Sellars, J. R, M. Tribus, and J. S. Klein: Heat Transfer to Laminar Flow in a Round
Tube or Flat Conduit-The Graetz Problem Extended, Trans. ASME, vol. 78, pp.
441- 448, 1956.
8. Siegel, R., E. M. Sparrow, and T. M. Hallman: Steady Laminar Heat Transfer in a
Circular Tube with Prescribed Wall Heat Flux, Appl. Sci. Res. Sec. A, vol. 7, p. 386,
1958.
9. Shah, R. K., and A. L. London: "Laminar Flow Forced Convection in Ducts," Aca￾demic Press, New York, 1978.
10. Sparrow, E. M., T. M. Hallman, andR. Siegel: Turbulent Heat Transfer in the Thermal
Entrance Region of a Pipe with Uniform Heat Flux, Appl. Sci. Res. Sec. A, vol. 7, p. 37,
1957.
11. Kays, W. M., and W. B. Nicoll: The Influence of Non-uniform Heat Flux on the
Convection Conductances in a Nuclear Reactor, Tech. Rept. 33, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Nov. 1, 1957.
12. Langhaar, H. L.: Steady Flow in the Transition Length of a Straight Tube, I Appl.
Mech., June, 1942.
13. Hornbeck, R. W.: An All-Numerical Method for Heat Transfer in the Inlet of a Tube,
ASME Paper No. 65-WA/HT-36, 1965.
14. Hornbeck, R W.: NASA SP-297, Washington, 1973.
15. Heaton, H. S., W. C. Reynolds, and W. M. Kays: Heat Transfer in Annular Passages.
Simultaneous Development of Velocity and Temperature Fields in Laminar Flow, Int.
I Heat Mass Transfer, vol. 7, pp. 763 -781, 1964.

Fig. 6-1 Laminar-flow heat transfer and friction solutions for fully developed velocity and temperature
profiles.
GEOMETRY Nu® NUGJ f Re Nu@ St Pr2/3
(L!4rh > 100) NUGJ
--f￾r: 3.11 2.47 13.33 1.26 0.263
aD b
-=1
a 3.61 2.98 14.2 1.21 0.286
b
0 4.364 3.66 16 1.19 0.307
al I
b
-=4 5.33 4.44 18.3 1.20 0.328
a
b
b
a] I -= 8 6.49 5.60 20.6 1.16 0.355
b
a
b
- = 00 8.235 7.54 24 1.09 0.386
a
b
-= 00 5.385 4.86 24 1.11 0.253
a
////////// /
0
3.556 3.018 14.2
0
2.836 2.375 14.2
0
2.712 2.437 14.2
0
4.094 3.703 14.2
';/8,-0 If (It) = q:' (1 + b cos II)
Nu® (0)
(1+bcos8)
(ll +.Q.cos 81
48 2

Fig. 6-2 Friction factors for fUllydeveloped laminar flow in rectangu￾lar tubes.
Fig. 6-3 Nusselt numbers for laminar flow in rectangular tubes with fUlly developed velocity
and temperature profiles.
b
.0
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
1(,,*
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
)
I
I a I
a
b
b
I.....-
,,*=1:'=20 0' * = Q
K=~=5.0 1 . a
,\
"'" I
,
I'<"ICONSTANT HEAT INPUT
"~--
,
...............
t---
r--t---+--
" CONSTANT
WALL TEMPERATURE
I
4.0
1.0
8.0
6.0
0.0
0.0
7.0
9.0
3.0
2.0
10.0
5.0
Db
(l·i· 1.0
. .
I/o:
14.01 I I I I I I I I I I
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 '0.9 1.0
(tRe/"" 1
18.0
15.01 I I
21.0
25.01--
"0 ~_ 0-
a.·~=5.0 a.··i-.2.0
-to
-

122 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 6-4 Friction factors for fully developed laminar flow in concentric-circular-tube
annuli.
24
23
22
21
(fRo ).. 20
19
18
17
16
l--....--
V￾i/
I @ I
I
o 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
r*

Analytic Solutions for Flow in Tubes 123
Fig.6-5 Nusselt numbers andinfluence coefficients for laminar flow inconcen￾tric-circular-tube annuli for constantheat rate per unit of tube lengthand fully
developed velocityandtemperature profiles.
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
r*
I
Nu
I
Ii @
\
\
1\
'\
<,
r-,....
t-:::I--
Nu 00
V
\
1\
""" ----
i----
=
1.0
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
4.0
0
2.0
8.0
9.0
6.0
7.0
1.5
5.0
16.0
15.0
13.0
10.0
14.0
11.0
12.0

124 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 6-6 Friction factors forfully developedturbulent flowina smooth-walled circular tube.Turbulent flow
friction factors forrectangular andannular tubes do notdiffer significantly from these.
0.015
0.0 10
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.003
0.002
0
I ! 11 I:
[
I
I
!
I
I
l'
I I ,
I !
f = 0.079 Re 0.25
j...[ /
f-- ~I'
-+t:"-{, '-i--,- , "--..... ;
J I 1""-10-t--I... ; f = 0.046Re- 0 2 r
I i
i
7 ,
I
!
I
I
I I . I - -f!-lo-
, i i
- --Lri- '
r--w
I V
!
, ! KARMAN-NIKURA1DSE
I :
l-+rrttTION , .
. -"-i- --,
I
, i I ! I i I I •
10'
Re
10' 10 6

Analytic Solutions for Flow in Tubes 125
Fig.6-7 Nusseltnumbersfor turbulentflow inacirculartubewith constantheatrate
per unit of tube length and fUlly developed velocityand temperatureprofiles.
./
1/
1)/ I- o
V vI'
20,OOOf----
30,000r------,--,--,.-,--,-,----.----,----,---,-,-rTT:l
/ ./ V
/ / V f11 /!/V
./
./
./
V
/ V[/
/
:/ II·VVV
/ V V
/ V / V
/ /
/
//V
./
./
v
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
800
600
400
300
Nu
200
40 .// ./
30//
V
2a
V
I,.;v
V
J,...--
0 ........
8 -6
4
3
v
0.000
2 3 4 6 8 10 5
Re
2 3 4

126 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 6-8 Ratio of Nusselt number for constant heat rate to Nusselt
number for constant surface temperature for fUllydeveloped turbu￾lent flow in a circular tube.
1.4 h-orrnt--+--+-+++++H--+O.10
f·005
............. 0.01
1.1
Nu@
Nu (!) 1.3
1. 2
Re

Fig.6-9 Nusseltnumbersfor turbulentflow betweenparallel planeswith onesideinsulated,
constant heat rate per unit of tube length, and fully developed velocity and temperature
profiles.
30,000
20,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
800
600
Nu 400
300
200
100
80
60
40
30
20
10
8
6
4
3
1/1/
V
/
./
/ 1/
/ / 1/ 1/
0/ /
/ 1/ Pr = 1,00
I
1/1/ /
/
/
/
1/
n
V I/V
/
V V /
./
/
3g., ./ /
./ VI /
/ / 10 / / 1/
/ /
V l/r / ./ / V
/ /
V
1/ J
V/ /
/// V
/ /1 -:V
./ V
V :1
-:
./';/
/
./ ./ 0.7
../ 0.5 ./ ./ ./ ../
./ ./ ./
/
././ 1/
.///./ Y
/
.> Pr = /
V
V /1/
V
./
1."..0'
O.O~
e..- .--
L..----' I
0.001 ....
0.000
127

128 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 6-10 Influence coefficients for computation of asymmetric heating for turbulent flow
between parallel planes, constant heat rate per unit of tube length, and fully developed
velocity and temperature profiles.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.08
Z
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.003
0.002
/1////////////
0.000
0.001
0.003 1\
-- 1"-
f-!-~ t---
~.~ 0.5 0.03 t￾I--
1.0
I
3
1'0
3
10
100
Pr = 1,000
0.001
10' 10 5
Re

Fig. 6-11 Nusselt numbers for turbulent flow in a concentric-circular-tube annulus of radius
ratio 0.20, outer surface insulated. constant heat rate per unit of tube length, and fUlly
developed velocity and temperature profiles.
30,000
20,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
800
600
Nu
400
300
200
100
80
60
40
30
20
10
8
6
4
3
0 /
y/
/ 1/
r" 0.20
/
V / 1/
/ / V
/ / /
Pr =1,00Q/ V V t>
1/ .:/ V
V
1/ l.,y
/ W 7 /
V vi/ V
/ ./ 30 / V
./
-/ /
./ 10 /
7 / t> 1/
/ / l,,/I 7 / / /
17 I v/ /
/
[7 /
l} -://
V7V V 1
I V/
V V
17
V
1/ V
V V
/ 1/1/ kl/
./" / [./ 0.7
/ ..- 0.5
./ 1/
771/
'/'/ 1/
[7 Pr =0.03V
./
V l/V
V 0e;-V
j....-]....1..- V
--l.--
-------
0.001
0.000
129

Fig. 6-12 Nusselt numbers for turbulent flow in a concentric-circular-tube annulus of radius
ratio 0.20. inner surface insulated, constant heat rate per unit of tube length. and fUlly
developed velocity and temperature profiles.
130
30,000
20,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
800
600
Nu
400
300
200
100
80
60
40
30
20
10
8
6
4
3
0 I/L/
r* - 0.20 1/
/
/
/ V 1/
/ :/ /
Pr := 1,000/ /
/V 1/
V / /
/
/
/
V
/
/ 151 /
1/ 1/ 1/
/ 30 /
1/ / A 1/ 1/ f/
/
-:; /
1,g,
/ 1/
/
--; / 1/ '/
/ / / / 1/ / / /
/ / V 3 / / V
//V /
//
17 V/'/ /
/
V V /
,,/'j.(V
/
// /
/ 1/ / 0.7
/
-/ / 0.5 V 1/
/ // 1/
/// 1/
V/ /V
V Pr
V ,,/
/,1/'
O~
i-- /'"
.7 0.003 - ..... £
-- I.-"-
- 0.000

Fig.6-13 Influence coefficients forcomputation of asymmetric heatingfor turbulentflowina
concentric-circular-tube annulus of radius ratio 0.20, constant heat rate per unit of tube
length, andfUlly developed velocity andtemperature profiles.
1.00
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Z 0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
G
Z,
------ Z"
r* =0.20 I I
0jOO01"\
°iOO
I
1
M
0.01 - -
I
r--...L 0.7
0.03-t,,1'-
1----f-..l- ""-1-1- I I 1--1
3 0.001 0.00j: .....
/=" -- --- ....
--- _ 0.01
-l-- ~03 F- lO-f-- 0.03
-- -- JJ.5 J:-::t.0.7
- -I￾I - - '-I- .-
-
-
30
1--- - - - 1- 3
--- - - -
100
------ >- 10
--- - ---
-
30
1,000
1"..100
Pr =1,000
10·
131

-W
l.:l
Fig. 6-14 Effect of radius ratio on Nusselt numbers and
influence coefficients for turbulent flow in concentric-circu￾lar-tube annuli with constant heat rate and fUlly developed
velocity and temperature profiles; Re = 100,000, Pr=
0.7.
Fig.6·15 Effect of radius ratio on Nusselt numbers and
influence coefficients for turbulent flow in concentric-cir￾cular-tube annuli with constant heat rate and fUlly devel￾oped velocity and temperature profiles; Re = 100,000,
Pr = 0.01.
o 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
10
9
8
7
6
13
12
11
r*
o 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
230
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
0.3
0.2
0.1
o
r*
r-,
r--r-- Z
-
Zo -
e--
,....-
--
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
o
\
r-,
r-,
r--I----
==- -
I-"
f.--
./'"
................

Analytic Solutions for Flow in Tubes 133
Fig.6-16 Thermal-entry-Iength Nusseltnumbersfor laminarflow in a circulartube with constantsurface
temperature and fully developed velocityprofile.
80
60
50
40
30
20
15
Nu 10
8
6
5
4
3
2
0
K r--..
"'- --r---~m
I---.
--
..-
I--.... ........
- f----- ......
Nux --
---
r￾r---- -
t--
- f--
- f-- 3.66
0.002 0.0040.006 0.01 0.02 0.040.06 0.100.0150.20 0.400.60
2(XIDI

I;.j
Fig. 6-17 Thermal-entry-Iength Nusselt numbers and influence coefficients for laminar flow in a circular tube and flow between
parallel planes with one side insulated. constant heat rate, and fUlly developed velocity profiles.
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
Z
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
2 0.02
C
L
Il￾I
I
0
'//LV/< V
V
=:::: ')v L
I----l￾I/
L-
---
L￾L- ./
-<; -.-: -l-
/'
t F-- 5.38
/
/
:1'
3
/
F--- -+:-.4.
0
L
4.364 l-
)
I
I
4
3
20
80
60
10
8
6
40
30
Nu
0.002 0.004 0.01 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.10
2(X/D)
Re Pr
0.20 0.40 0.60

Fig. 6-18 Thermal-entry-Iength local Nusselt numbers and influence coefficients for laminar flow in concentric-circular-tube
annuli with constant heat rate and fUllydeveloped velocity profiles.
2.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
Z
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.62
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.10 0.20 0.40 0.60
2(X/D)
Re Pr
0.002 0.004 0.01
2
@ ---- -1-
.....
Z. r. 0.1 V
./ 0.528
--b-
/' Nu ii V r* = 0.1 ./
-- '--- V r* = 0.5 0.216 r-- V - -T--r-r-
<, 19 /
r- vI--'
r-- V
i"-I'-t-- ""X --r- 0
0.0562 /'
L r-- 6.18 / /' .L /
Nu 00 J' bV "
/' f'
V - r* = 0.1" ...... 4.83 1\
-: V r* = O.f- V V 5.04
V
-:V %
'~(1"5
V
l..-{,. =;0.1
4
3
20
10
8
6
40
30
100
80
60
200
Nu
-W
c:Jl

136 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 6-19 Thermal-entry-Iength local Nusselt numbers for laminar flow in rectangular ducts with
constant surface temperature and fUlly developed velocity profiles.
10
8
x
6
5
4
3
b
al I
-
b/a 00
7.55
r-:::::--I--.
r--r--- b a 6 I
b/a 4
--5.22 _
f--
r-::::f::::::--f-- 4.51
r--r-::: b/a - 2 I
t--r--1-1- b/a = 1
- -3.39
2T
f--
0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.06 0.080.10 0.20 0.30 0.40
2IX/D)
RePr
Fig. 6-20 Thermal-entry-Iength local Nusselt numbers for turbulent flow in a
circular tube with constant heat rate and fully developed velocity profiles,
showing influence of Reynolds number at Pr = 0.7.
1. 20 r----r-----,r-----,r-------,
o
Nux
Nu ..
1.10 f-~f----1f----1'--~
20 30 40
(X/OJ
10
1.00L L
o

Analytic Solutions for Flow in Tubes 137
Fig.6-21 Thermal-entry-Iength localNusseltnumbers for turbulentflowina
circulartube with constant heat rate and fully developed velocityprofiles,
showinginfluence of Reynolds numberat Pr = 0.01.
,\ 0
\\
\\
1\ \
\\\
\\ \ Pr = 0.01
\\ VRe = 200,000
\
/50,000
-, I'--
:::-----=c----
2.0
1.5
1.0
o 10 20
(X/D)
30 40
Fig.6-22 Thermal-entry-Iength localNusseltnumbersfor turbulentflow ina
circular tube with constant heat rate and fUlly developed velocityprofiles,
showinginfluence of Prandtlnumberat Re = 100,000.
1.30 .-----.-.-----.-------,,-------,
10 30 40
1.10 f--~+---''t-;/-
1. 20 f----l---'\---I-----I-----1
1.00 L __---L_==:::::l:==::!,;;;;;;;;:::±===01
o
Nux
Nu ce

138 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 6·23 Local, mean, and total apparent friction factors for laminar flow in the hydrodynamic entry length
of a circular tube. The momentum flux correction factor for the hydrodynamic entry length is also plotted.
80 ........
../"
60
tappRe￾50
../"
..-Y"
40
a:
Ql
Ql
Ql 1--- ..... l----"""-
....--- _x :;-a: ..- fRe 1- _
- ~o
b->
I---'"" V-- -- -- --- ---
...-1- txRe P--
20
I--_I- ---"""" - ...... f- - I. -
15 15
f(d· 1.3
Kd \
-e
'"
Re/(x/D) 1.0
6 8 10 20 so 40 50 60 80 100 200 ~o 400500
Fig. 6-24 Local Nusselt numbers for the combined hydrodynamic and thermal entry length of a circular tube,
laminar flow.
40.0
30.0
20.0
15.0
;:JX 10.0
z
8.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
ol
CONSTANT SURFACE TEMPERATURE
Pr = 0.; I
.......
/2.0
- Pr::oo
....... ...... -c
.......,; <, 5.0
....... I'--
r-...; e--
......
3.66 1--- - e--- -_.
2.0
0.001 0.002
0.0015
0.004 0.006 0.01
0.008
0.015 0.02 0.03 0.05 0.08
0.06 0.10
2(X/OJ
RePr

Fig.6-25 MeanNusseltnumbersfor the combinedhydrodynamicandthermalentry lengthof a circulartube.
laminarflow.
0.06 0.10
0.08
0.003 0.004 0.006 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.03 0.04
0.008
2(X/OI
RePr
0
<,
pr~n
I I I I
:::::-::
CONSTANT SURFACE TEMPERATURE-
<,
./ -...........;: ::::::;;::: ...... 2.0
Pr-+ 00 ....... :<>< ! 5.0
....:::::::
:::~ ...... <kr-.........
......... ......
<; ......
r--...:: ............_........
--;
-..F::::
--
"-- -~- ._-- .
2.0
0.001 0.0015
0.002
3.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
20.0
8.0
40.0
30.0
15.0
:JE 10.0
z
Fig.6-26 Local Nusseltnumbersfor the combinedhydrodynamicand thermalentry lengthof a circulartube.
laminarflow.
<, CONSTANT HEAT RATE
I I I I I 0
<,
<,
<, Pr = 0.01
::::::::
<, ........
......
~K~·71
<,
:::-.........
r......r--. 10.0
-
-.. ./
"""-
/
Pr--. 00 ~ ............... -- -..........
:-- r---I-
..........I'--:r-f-..
20.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
30.0
15.0
x 10.0
:J
Z 8.0
3.0
2.0
0.002 0.0030.004 0.0060.0080.01 0.0150.02 0.030.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.150.20
21X/OI
RePr
139

7
Experimental Correlations
for Simple Geometries
In the course of the experimental work leading to the compilation oftest data in
Chap. 10, sufficient data have been obtained for certain of the simple flow
geometries to permit a generalized presentation of basic heat transfer and
flow-friction performance. In addition, the simple geometries, such as flow
through circular and rectangular tubes, have been at least partially handled by
analytic means. Thus, by a judicious combination of analytical and experimental
data, it is possible to present a comprehensive treatment of gas flow through
circular and rectangular tubes with abrupt contraction entrances, including
effects oftube length, type of heating, and temperature-dependent fluid proper￾ties. Similarly, as a result of the large amount of experimental data obtained for
flow normal to staggered banks of circular tubes, a generalized treatment ofthis
particular geometry is possible, which allows interpolation to staggered patterns
that have not been tested. Extensive data have been obtained by various investi￾gators for three common types of matrix surfaces that can be used in periodic￾flow heat exchangers. Correlations of experimental data on randomly stacked
screen matrices, sphere matrices, and triangular-tube matrices are presented in
this chapter, rather than in Chap. 10, because each graph represents a range of
geometry, and the curves are based on an interpretation of the work of various
experimenters. The experimental data presented in Chap. 10 are the direct test
results of a particular geometry and a single set of tests, and with a few excep￾tions the actual test points are presented.
It is recommended that the generalized curves in this chapter, rather than the
direct test results, be used for heat exchanger design for gas flow in circular and
rectangular tubes, except for those cases where the surface to be used is
identical with the test surface; this includes length-to-diameter ratio and the
type of entrance. Even in this case, it should be noted that if the direct test data
are used for flow in long tubes, a separate correction for temperature-dependent
properties should be made. Also, the test data were practically all obtained with
constant wall temperature, and if applied to heat exchangers with other types of
wall-temperature variation, slightly different performance will be obtained (see

Experimental Correlations for SimpleGeometries 141
Fig. 10-22). These considerations are not important for the interrupted type of
surface but can be significant for flow in long uninterrupted tubes.
For flow normal to banks of staggered circular tubes, the test data in Chap. 10
are recommended for design for the particular layout patterns tested, and the
generalized data in the present chapter are recommended for interpolation to
patterns that have not been tested. However, even if the direct data ofChap. 10
are employed, they should be corrected for number of tube rows by Fig. 7-7.
The only direct test data on matrix surfaces presented in Chap. 10 are for flow
through crossed-rod matrices. There is no counterpart in Chap. 10 for the
matrix-surface summary curves presented in this chapter.
Figure 7-1 presents a summary of both analysis and experiment for gas flow
through circular tubes in the moderate Reynolds number range. The laminar￾flow curves are based on the data in Chap. 6 for combined hydrodynamic and
thermal entry length, and have been found experimentally to be applicable even
when an abrupt-contraction entrance is used. The turbulent-flow data are the
result of a correlation of a large amount of experimental data, including rather
importantly the entry-length data ofBoelter et al. [1] for a tube with an abrupt￾contraction entrance. The Stanton numbers are all averages with respect to tube
length, and this can be used directly in the heat exchanger theory of Chap. 2.
The transition data, in the Reynolds number range 2,500 to 10,000, are subject
to considerable uncertainty because of the stability nature of the transition
problem. For a single tube these data may be meaningless, but the curves
presented represent what is typically obtained for a large number of tubes in
parallel, all with abrupt-contraction entrances, as is typical of most circular-tube
heat exchangers. Some typical direct test data are shown in Fig. 10-1, but the
transition region of Fig. 7-1 is based not only on Fig. 10-1 but also on the results
of several other investigators [2]. As a general rule, one would prefer to design
outside this region, but in compact heat exchanger applications, the Reynolds
number range of interest is usually about 500 to 15,000; thus the transition
region can hardly be avoided. Even if the design point falls above 10,000, the
heat exchanger will operate in the transition region at part load. These curves
should not be used outside the gas Prandtl number range.
Figures 7-2 to 7-4 are based on much the same kinds of considerations as Fig.
7-1, although the analytic basis for the laminar combined hydrodynamic and
thermal-entry-length data is less complete. The rectangular tubes are assumed
to be formed by fins extending between plates as in a plate-fin heat exchanger,
and thus the abrupt contraction is essentially a two-dimensional one rather than
three-dimensionally axially symmetric as for the circular tubes. This results in a
less pronounced entry-length effect in the turbulent flow region. An interesting
feature of high-aspect-ratio rectangular tubes is that the transition "dip" is less
pronounced than for other shapes; there is thus less uncertainty in designing in
this region. Another more bothersome feature is that if the rectangular tubes are
formed by thin fins placed between plates, slight irregularities in the fin spacing
can cause a substantial drop in the apparent heat transfer performance of the
overall heat exchanger core. This is due to the unequal flow distribution be￾tween fins that results from the higher flow resistance in the smaller passages.

142 Compact Heat Exchangers
Buckling of fins has the same effect. Direct test data for a great many plain
plate-fin surfaces in which the flow passages are close to rectangular will be
found in Chap. 10, and comparison of these data with the curves of Figs. 7-2 to
7-4 will give an idea of the kind of performance that can be expected from
commercially available plain-fin surfaces. These curves should not be used
outside of the gas Prandtl number range.
Correlations of heat transfer and friction data for flow normal to banks of
circular tubes are presented in Figs. 7-5 to 7-7. These correlations are based
entirely on the direct experimental data in Chap. 10 and should be used for
interpolation, since the direct data are probably more accurate for the particular
tube patterns tested. The tube-bank data can probably be employed with confi￾dence at moderately high Prandtl numbers, although the test data on which the
curves are based were obtained with Figure 7-7 shows the effect of a finite
number of tube rows in a tube bank. The correlations in Figs. 7-5 and 7-6 are
based on a bank of infinite extent, and this is also true of most of the direct test
data in Chap. 10. Thus Fig. 7-7 should be used in conjunction with both the
correlations and the direct data of Chap. 10. Figure 7-7 should also be used in
conjunction with the crossed-rod matrices in Chap. 10, Figs. 10-90 to 10-92.
The remaining graphs in this chapter are for surfaces of potential use as
matrices in periodic-flow heat exchangers. Figures 7-8 and 7-9 give correlations
of experimental data for flow through randomly stacked woven-wire screens
with various porosities. These correlations have not been included with the
direct test data in Chap. 10 because each curve has been established from tests
of wire screens at the low Reynolds number end but crossed-rod matrices at the
high Reynolds number end [3]. The correlation is believed to be valid, but the
curves do not represent the direct performance of anyone screen matrix. The
applicability of these data outside the gas Prandtl number range is uncertain.
Figure 7-10 shows a correlation of heat transfer and friction performance for
flow through a matrix formed of randomly stacked spheres, based on the work of
Coppage and London [4] and Denton et al. [5]. Again the applicability of these
results to Prandtl numbers outside the gas range is uncertain.
Matrix surfaces can be constructed in much the same manner as plate-fin
surfaces, and Fig. 7-11 shows a correlation of the test results by Mondt [6] for
matrices with triangular flow passages. The bulk of the data are in the laminar￾flow region, and the dashed lines in the laminar region are from Fig. 6-1 for an
equilateral triangle with fully established flow and constant surface tempera￾ture. Single curves represent equally well the performance of 50 to 90° trian￾gles, and the curves also demonstrate the applicability ofthe analytic solutions to
a gas in the low Reynolds number range «400).
REFERENCES
1. Boelter, L. M. K., G. Young, and H. W. Iversen: An Investigation of Aircraft Heaters
XXVII- Distribution of Heat TransferRate in the Entrance Section of a Circular Tube,
NACA TN 1451, July, 1948.
2. Kays, W. M., and A. L. London: Convection Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Behavior
of Small Cylindrical Tubes-Circular and Rectangular Cross Sections, Trans. ASME,
vol. 74, no. 7, 1952.

Experimental Correlations for Simple Geometries 143
3. Tong, L. S.: Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of Woven-Screen and
Crossed-Rod Matrices, Trans. ASME, vol. 79, no. 10, 1957.
A. L. London, J. W. Mitchell, and W. A. Sutherland: Heat Transfer and Flow-friction
Characteristics of Crossed-rod Matrices, Trans. ASME, Ser. C, vol. 82, p. 199, 1960.
4. Coppage, J. E., and A. L. London: Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of
Porous Media, Chern. Eng. Prog., vol. 52, no. 2, p. 57-F, 1956.
5. Denton, W. H., C. H. Robinson, and R. S. Tibbs: The Heat Transfer and Pressure Loss in
Fluid Flow through Randomly Packed Spheres, HPC-35 June 28, 1949. Available
through US AEC Tech. Information Div., Oak Ridge, Tenn.
6. Mondt, J. R.: Discussion of Paper No. 14, Intern. Heat Transfer Conf., 1961, Discussions
Sec., published by ASME, p. D-41.
Fig.7-1 Gasflow insidecirculartubes with abrupt-contractionentrances;a summaryof experimentaland
analytical data.
-
I
,
0
Re< 2,000 Re> 10,000
0.030
~
- Heating Cooling Heating Cooling __
<, m 1.0 10 -0.10 -0.1
n 0.0 0.0 -0.50 0.0
;J -,
0.020- -, I'"
0.015
<,
r-. 0.010 '\ -, <,
r-,
""........ ---
--f--.
0.0080
-,
'\.: ...."<>- ......... I" <, \ -- "
.....:--:.' L/D'.~ \" -, ,,,- LID_roo LID•• ........:::: :::----.:... -r--- 0.0060 "r..::: ..............0:'- -, \.... L/O- 2~ "-LID -50
0.0050
,~
,,-.......;.
-- -- -i- ---------
;:, r-...<,,
->-- 0.0040
~I "".... 0
....... ""-..:: ::?';f-
-~ r=:= - 8
f"-.::' 0.0030 /' IY' f- -- --
z-: 1'- LlO.$I:J\ LL/D'. - :::-
e,
Vi -- V 1"--
I ,
ILL/O_IOO -- L/O __ --" "....
L/O·Z5 r--::
=
,
0.0020
....
0.0015 =~
Re X 10-'
I I
0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 150 20.0 30.0 40.0 50.0

144 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 7-2 Gas flow inside rectangular tubes with abrupt-contraction entrances; a summary of experimental
and analytical data.
0.10 1-.---_
-- ---=F--F---f- il 0.08 I I I I
Re< 2,000 Re> 10,000
Heating Cooling Heating Cooling ex·. 1.00
0.05 m 1.0 H) -0.10 -0.1
<, '" n 0.0 0.0 -0.50 0.0
0.04 !! """Ii
0.03 -
~
0.02 --
~'
~ a.l4r,)'IOO
0.015
(8) ~o>
-, H ,,/4r,).40 ~-_.-
~4r,)'IO I
t'-..
--
(V4r,)'40
0.010 "" r-, lL/4r..) • 100 r--- ""l':::: ./ (L/4rh
) J: 00 f--- lLAr,).IOO . .>- ::--:K
"
1'-.. F
-
OE CO ~< =
0.00 c '\
~, I I
- ---...
'"
r-.l'-~
(8)1L/4r,). 40
0.04~
r--~ r- 100 - f---
-
_-f-
_.<:.lL~r,).co t' f::::> -c:l'--- :0---
O.OO3N
l..
'b
en <, /'V -, Q) (V4r.). 40 f:/ --.::::::::
lL/4r.) '100
0.002
1
-, I Y4
1
1j,) ' O>/
O. "9" Re X 103
I I
02 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.06.0. 8.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 30.0

Experimental Correlations for Simple Geometries 145
Fig. 7-3 Gas flow inside rectangular tubes with abrupt-contraction entrances; a summary of experimental
and analytical data.
0.10 IT 0.08 Re< 2,000 Re> 10,000 - t-- '"
Heoting Cooling Heating Cooling - t--
006 "- m 1.0 1.0 -0.10 -0.1
- t--
n 0.0 0.0 -0.50 0.0
005
~
...... CX·. 3.00
004 !!
0.03 - ..
r-. ~l/4'h)'40
~ lLI4'h),IOO
2 (8) ~ !L/4 '.,)' f--- 0.0 H (I/4r,).40
l\."'rh)'IOO
0.015
IV4rh),40
0010 <J:l.lLI4rh,·40 +-:: ",,'
<, ./ (V4rh),IOO :::-
I--+- 1J4'h) .100 '~
-
<,
- ././ (LI4rh
)= (lO
0.008 IV4r,) • "\: t~
I----t I'\I.~
0.006,;, I"t\~, I 1 -
0005? ~I'--. V(8)ILl4rh).40
0004!! '-- <, /(I.I4'h)'IOO -
s t'\'-- r-; -- i- (L14rh)1I CD
0.003 £t V
cfj
cr> (V4'h)' 40~ V 0.002 !LI4r.). 100
I
(V4r,,)- 00
00015 Re X 10'3
8
10
1160
I
0.2 0.3 04 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 150 20.0 30.0

146 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 7-4 Gas flow inside rectangular tubes with abrupt-eontraction entrances; a summary of experimental
and analytical data.
-
-
a* .8.00
-c---
-e----
--
-
r-0.l0--t---"c-"+-+-+---+-+++ 1--:t: :+--1-=-1 -t-(II I 1--===
0.08 .Ie
I· A.< 2,000 A.> 10,000
t-- I Heating Conling Heating Cooling
0.06 ~+-~~+-~+--+-H-+-+ m 1.0 1.0 -0.10 -0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.50 0.0
0.05 • --- - + _... +-+-~-j-l
.c I
0.04 - I
0.03 :-- ,/(V4r,I' 4~
~ :<//1I4r
, ), 100
002 ~"(8)1LI4r,lo40 ~K,/ILf4r,). 00
0015
C!JlV4 r, )o4 0 I
0.010 r----- (l.l4r,)"loo I7 "-
0.008 (LI4r, )" 00 ,/
1-
n.~ n.4 O. 0." o.a 1.0 1.5 2.0
Re X 10-3
3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 16.0 15.0 20.0 30.0
Fig.7-5 Gas flow normal to an infinite bank of staggered circular tubes, heat transfer
characteristics; a correlation of experimental data, average heat transfer coefficient
around tube periphery. StPr2
/
3 = ChR e--o.4 300 < Re < 15,000.
050
X\·'.25 ~ol.oOI
0.40 :::- .-1-- x,.o.re
.-
r::::: - ..d 0.30 C ~Xl,d.r h
/
W
o O.-L
./ o Xtd.
0.20 °OOT
o 0
0.10 -1 d l+-
10 1.5
Xt ?o ?l'\

Experimental Correlations for Simple Geometries 147
Fig. 7-6 Flow normal to an infinite bank of staggered circular tubes, flow friction
characteristics; a correlation of experimental data. f = ef
Re- o.
18 300 < Re <
15,000.
050 XfLOO/ XfO.7~
// I------'.....-
0.40
X,.1.2~/
/-- C,
./
030 ~)(ZJr
~/
_. f----
-- ----.- o 01-
!~
'/ - 0 Xtd 0.20
/'1:7' °OOT
o 0
0.10
Xl
, , 1
1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
Fig.7-7 Overall influence of row-to-row variations in the heat transfer coefficient
in tube banks. Data are based on staggered tube banks but apply equally well to
in-line tube banks and are a good approximation for crossed-rod and woven￾screen matrices.
1.00
I--
I--
.> -
0.90
/V
8
..c V
0.80 'z
<w
.+----~- - _ .
s:
0.70 . -- _.--
NO. OF ROWS OF TUBES
4 5 6 8 10 20 30 405060 80 100 200

....
01:0-
00 Fig. 7-8 Gas flow through an infinite randomly stacked woven-screen matrix, heat transfer characteristics; a correlation of experimental data from wire screens and
crossed rods simulating wire screens. Perfect stacking, i.e., screens touching, is assumed. G = W/pArr, rh = pja.
4 6 8 10
5
4 6 8 10 2
4
4 6 8 10 2
3
4 6 8 10 2
2
2 4 6 8 10 2
I
8
6
4
I
......
r- f:::S::: 1E "
........1"-
e
R ::::::
......... 1--..... -~
~u
... '" Ii r--.......::: ....... :::::1"-
......... -+ V/
I a.. .........1--. r-,
s
a(J)- r-....
<, r--,....... -N ......... I"""': ......... <,
Porosity
....... ~""I'-.. o 0.832
.. 0.817
• 0.766 -...........:::
~
e c 0.725
v 0.675 r--
• 0.602
...
I
B
6
4
e
I
o
o
o
0.0:
0.0'
o
o
0.0
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.00

Fig.7-9 Flowthroughaninfiniterandomlystackedwoven-screen matrix,flow-frictioncharacteristics; acorrelationof experimental data from wirescreensandcrossed
rods simulating wire screens. Perfectstacking, l.e., screenstouching,is assumed.G = W/pAfr , Th = plo:
2 3 4 6 8 105
.....
2 3 4 6 8 104
... ,. i I
2 3 4 6 8 103
Re = 4 rhG/.u
:f-.....
2 3 4 6 8 102
r-,"".-r-,
"""""'-
2 3 4 6 8 10
Porosity
o 0.832 -t---+-+--+-+++--
I I I I I I I I II • 0.766
D 0.725
• 0.602
I I
10
8
6
4
3
2
I￾I
0·8
0·6
0·4
0·3
0·2
01
-w::..

Fig.7-10 Gas flow through an infiniterandomlystacked sphere matrix. A correlationof experimentaldata with porosity varyingfrom 0.37 to 0.39. Seetabulationof data in Chap. 10.
G = WjpAr,. T'h = pla.
o
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.008
0.006
~~ <, t/ty/, ./.X /1/.
( " i' r
<, ~_ » X 1.)5
<,
r-,
r-.l"- I
r-,
f
'+-
l'-
1'-....
<,
--....... ---.
- --t--- -+--
r--- t--t￾f--
-- -t--
'--~ r--- t---l--
N
a':: ----- -r-- -ci5 1--1--
'""- -
StPr 2/3 = I----
t--r-...t--
----r--
I--
Re
8.0
6.0
5.0
4;0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
2 3 4 5 6 8 10 2
2 3 4 5 6 8 10 3
2 3 4 5 6 8 10 4
2 3 4 5

Fig. 7-11 Gas flow through a matrix composed of triangular flow passages. A correlationof experimentaldata for isosceles
triangle matrices, apex angle varying from 50 to 90". Dashed lines in the laminar-flow region are the analytic solutions for
constant surface temperature for an equilateral triangle, L/rh = 00; in the turbulent-flow region the dashed lines are the
circular-tube characteris1ics.
-
. , 50°<",<90° -
-
-
-
'\,
-
-, f',
L/4rh> 70 -
"
r...
"
-
-, -,
-
-
-
"
.. -
I"'-
-
1/ I'>..
EQUILATERAL /' 'I\.. TRIANGLE
L/4r h=- ~
-~
...
c..
... " L/4rh>70 r-, (f)
--
--
1-_-
c;:::
- Re
-
0,6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.008
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
2 3 4 5 6 8 10 2
2 3 4 5 6 8 10 3
2 3 4 5 6 8 10 4
2

8
Experimental Methods
The bulk of the experimental data reported in Chap. 10 was obtained at Stanford
University and at the U.S. Navy Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis,
Maryland. At both laboratories a steam-to-air test system was employed for all
tests, with the exception of the circular-tube banks, one plate-fin test core, and
the matrix surfaces. For the circular-tube banks and the crossed-rod matrices
tested at Stanford, a transient test technique was employed, although the same
air duct was used as for the steam-to-air tests. One plain plate-fin core tested at
Stanford was hot-water-heated rather than steam-heated, but again the same air
duct was used. The other matrix surfaces were tested using a transient technique
different from that employed for the tube-bank tests.
Detailed descriptions of the experimental apparatus and method of test data
analysis employed at the U.S. Navy Engineering Experiment Station and at
Stanford are contained in Refs. 1 to 6. Essentially the same test technique, and
similar equipment, were used at the Engineering Experiment Station and at
Stanford for the steam-to-air tests; therefore, only the Stanford system will be
described. The steam-to-air apparatus and methods will be described first,
followed by the transient systems.
STEAM-TO-AIR TESTS
The principal element ofthe test apparatus was a controllable-flow air duct with
a rectangular test section, 81 by 91 in., into which cores containing the heat
transfer surfaces under investigation were inserted. The test cores were cross￾flow heat exchangers allowing for air heating on one side at the expense of
condensing steam on the other side. The air-flow rate was metered by standard
flat-plate orifices installed in a 12-in.-diameter circular portion of the test duct
downstream from the test section. The orifices were constructed and installed in
accordance with ASME specifications, Ref. 7. Orifice coefficients from this
reference were used.
Air temperature measurements upstream and downstream of the test section
and at the orifice were made by calibrated, radiation-shielded, single-junction,

Experimental Methods 153
iron-constantan thermocouples. For the duct section downstream from the test
core, 27-point traverses were made in order to obtain an accurate bulk mean
temperature. For the other positions, 9-point traverses were taken. Steam
temperatures were measured by iron-constantan thermocouples welded into
brass tubes.
Air pressure differentials and gauge pressures at both the test section and the
orifice were measured by a system of piezometer rings with inclined draft
gauges and vertical single-leg water manometers. Steam-gauge pressures were
measured with mercury manometers.
A steam system supplied slightly superheated steam at an accurately con￾trolled pressure to the test core. Roughly four times as much steam was blown
through the core as was condensed, in order to prevent the build-up of a
substantial condensate-film thermal resistance. Both condensate and excess
steam were separately metered so that an energy-balance check could be made
on the accuracy of the instrumentation by comparing the energy loss of the
steam to the energy gain of the air. The average deviation from balance was
consistently less than 3 percent.
Measurements of air temperature upstream and downstream ofthe test core,
air-flow rate, steam pressures and temperatures, and air pressure drop through
the test core, together with a consideration of the steam-side condensate-film
heat transfer resistance (less than 10 percent ofthe total), the pressure losses at
the entrance and exit to the test core, and the temperature ineffectiveness of the
extended surface, provided sufficient information for the determination of the
Stanton number (h/Gcr,) and friction factor f Together with the Reynolds
number (4rhG/P.), also established from the above measurements, these com￾prise the nondimensional heat transfer and flow-friction characteristics of the
surface under investigation.
The thermocouple systems were designed to measure all temperatures to an
accuracy of ±O.2°F. Straightening vanes and trim tabs were provided and
adjusted to ensure a very nearly uniform air velocity in the duct at the test
section. Considerable effort was expended to provide accurately controlled
conditions for steady-state operation. Various cross-checks were provided so
that a continuous verification was made of the accuracy of the instrumentation.
An analysis of experimental uncertainty was made considering the following
possible sources of error:
1. Uncertainties inherent in the design and performance of the test system
2. Instrument uncertainty
3. Uncertainties introduced by virtue ofthe idealizations and the accuracy of
the transport properties, viscosity, and thermal conductivity
4. Uncertainties in the determination of the test-core dimensions
The probable uncertainty in the final results of the steam-to-air tests varies
somewhat for different test cores and for different air-flow rates. A conservative
estimate is given below from the analysis of a number of different tests, and this
estimate is believed to be approximately applicable to all of the test results
reported.

154 Compact Heat Exchangers
St
Pr
StPr2
/
3
f
Re
± 3.5 percent
±5.0 percent
±5.0 percent
±5.0 percent
± 2.0 percent
The principal difference between the test ducts at the U.S. Navy Engineering
Experiment Station and at Stanford University is that the former had a forced
draft while the latter had an induced-draft blower. With induced draft, uniform
flow conditions across the core could be established with relative ease.
TRANSIENT TESTS OF TUBE BANKS AND
CROSSED-ROD MATRICES
The transient tests of tube banks and crossed-rod matrices were carried out in
the same air duct as described for the steady-state steam-to-air tests. The tube
banks under test were built into test cores, with a 8t by 91 in frontal area, using
t-in.-diameter aluminum tubes fitted into a pair of plastic tube sheets at the top
and bottom of the test core. The same core frame and tubes were used for all
patterns, the only differences being in the removable tube sheets. For the
friction-factor tests the procedure was identical to that described for the steam￾to-air cores. However, heat transfer performance was established by a novel
transient-test scheme whereby one of the aluminum tubes was replaced by an
externally identical copper thermal-capacitor rod. The copper rod contained a
thermocouple, and the test procedure involved heating the rod to about 30°F
above air-flow temperature, inserting it at the desired location in the core, and
recording its temperature-time history on cooling. From these data the heat
transfer conductance can be readily deduced. The validity of this method of
testing was established by comparing the results for two circular-tube patterns
with the results obtained for the same patterns with steam-heated steady-state
test cores. It was found that the method was excellent for staggered tubes, but
somewhat limited in usefulness for in-line banks. The virtue of the transient
method lies in Its simplicity and accuracy and the speed with which data for a
large variety of tube patterns can be obtained. Experimental uncertainty has
been analyzed and is found to be about the same for both f and StPr2
/
3 as found
for the steady-state tests.
The procedure for the crossed-rod matrices was virtually identical to that for
the tube banks, except that the nonactive tubes were plastic and the test duct
was circular rather than rectangular.
TRANSIENT TESTS OF SCREEN AND
SPHERE MATRICES
The matrix surfaces were tested in an entirely different test apparatus. Because
of the character of the matrix surfaces, a transient test technique is virtually
mandatory. For the small flow passages used, it was also not practicable to
measure directly the matrix surface temperature. The system used involved
heating the matrix uniformly with a stream of hot air, changing the entering air

Experimental Methods 155
temperature suddenly to a lower uniform temperature by a quick flow-switching
method, and recording the temperature-time history of the air leaving the test
core. The surface heat transfer conductance could then be deduced from the
maximum slope of the temperature-time plot by an analysis that is fully de￾scribed in Refs. 4 and 5. The theoretical solution used for this purpose is
presented in Fig. 3-15.
The test duct and test cores for the stacked screen and sphere matrices were
circular in section with diameters of2.93 in. The stacked-screen test cores were
constructed by stacking together 2.93-in-diameter sections of screen to the
desired core depth. The sphere matrix was similar, with the small spheres
packed in a 2.93-in-diameter can. The glass ceramic matrix test cores were 3t in
square in cross section. Air-flow rates were measured by both ASME standard
orifices and a Fischer-Porter flowrater. All temperatures were measured by
iron-constantan thermocouples. Eight thermocouples in series were used to
measure the critical core upstream and downstream temperatures. Pressures
were measured by inclined draft gauges and vertical water manometers.
A detailed analysis ofthe experimental uncertainty ofthis system yielded the
following results:
REFERENCES
St
StPr2
/
3
f
Re
±13 percent
±14 percent
± 3 percent
± 2 percent
1. London, A.L., and C. K. Ferguson: GasTurbine Plant Regenerator Surfaces,Bureau of
Ships Research Memorandum 2-46, Navships (250-338-3), July, 1946.
2. London, A. L., and C. K. Ferguson: Test Results of High Performance Heat Exchanger
Surfaces Used in AircraftIntercoolers and Their Significancefor GasTurbine Regener￾ator Design, Trans. ASME, vol. 71, p. 12, 1949.
3. Kays, W. M., and A. L. London: Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of
Some Compact Heat Exchanger Surfaces-Part I: Test System and Procedure, Trans.
ASME, vol. 72, pp. 1075-1085, 1950.
4. Coppage, J. E., and A. L. London: Heat Transfer and Friction Characteristics of Porous
Media, Chern. Eng. Prog., February, 1956.
5. Pucci, P. F., C. F. Howard, and C. H. Piersall, Jr.: The Single-Blow Transient Testing
Techniques for Compact Heat Exchange Surfaces,]. Engr. Power, Trans. ASME, Ser. A,
vol. 89, pp. 29 - 40, 1967.
6. Kays, W. M., A.L. London, and R. K.La: Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteris￾tics for Gas Flow Normal to Tube Banks- Use of a Transient Test Technique, Trans.
ASME, vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 387-396, 1954.
7. "Fluid Meters, Their Theory and Application," 4th Ed., ASME Research Publication,
1937.

9
Heat Transfer Surface Geometry
The purpose of this chapter is to bring together in one place the complete
geometrical descriptions of the compact heat transfer surfaces for which the
direct performance data are given in Chap. 10. Actually, all the data presented
here are also given in the captions to the direct-performance-data graphs in
Chap. 10 and on the graphs themselves. However, by assembling this informa￾tion in one place, it is much more convenient to compare one surface with
another when it is only the geometry that is being studied.
The data are assembled in Tables 9-1 to 9-7, and scale diagrams of the
surfaces are given in Figs. 9-1 to 9-18. The various types of compact surfaces are
grouped together in the following order:
1. Tubular surfaces (Figs. 9-1 to 9-2)
a. Flow inside circular and flattened circular tubes
b. Flow normal to banks of tubes
2. Plate-fin surfaces (Figs. 9-3 to 9-9)
a. Plain fins
b. Louvered fins
c. Strip fins
d. Wavy fins
e. Pin fins
f Perforated fins
3. Flow normal to banks of finned tubes (Figs. 9-10 to 9-13)
a. Circular fins and tubes
b. Circular tubes, continuous fins
c. Flat tubes, continuous fins
4. Matrix surfaces (Figs. 9-14 to 9-18)
Each of these categories will now be described briefly.
The tubular surfaces, illustrated in Figs. 9-1 and 9-2, are the simplest form of
compact heat transfer surface. Test data have been obtained for flow both inside
and normal to tube banks, using circular tubes and tubes that have been flat-

Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 157
tened to an oval shape. A further variation of the flattened tube is the dimpled
tube; dimpling is sometimes used as a method of boundary-layer interruption to
increase the heat transfer conductance without increasing flow velocity.
A semidescriptive method of surface designation is employed. Thus ST indi￾cates flow inside straight tubes, while FT refers to flattened tubes and FTD to
flattened and dimpled tubes. For flow normal to banks of circular tubes, the tube
arrangement is designated according to whether the arrangement isstaggered or
in-line, and then by the transverse and longitudinal pitch ratios. Thus surface S
1.50-1.00 is a staggered arrangement with a transverse pitch ratio of 1.50
diameters and a longitudinal (flow direction) pitch ratio of 1.00 diameters. The
letter I before the numerals indicates an in-line arrangement. Part of the circu￾lar-tube-bank surfaces were tested by a steady-state steam-to-air technique, and
the remainder by a transient technique. The type of test is indicated in Fig. 9-2
and also in the captions to the direct test data in Chap. 10.
The dimensional information for the tubular surfaces in Tables 9-1 and 9-2
includes the hydraulic diameter, free-flow to frontal-area ratio, and heat transfer
area per unit of volume for each of the surfaces. These are needed in addition to
the basic heat transfer and flow-friction performance data in order to complete
the heat exchanger analysis. The given dimensions apply to the particular
surfaces as tested. Since the basic heat transfer and flow-friction design data in
Chap. 10 are presented in nondimensional form, they should apply equally well
to surfaces of different size, i.e., tubes of different diameter, providing only that
complete geometrical similarity with the test surface is maintained. This is also
true of all the other heat transfer surfaces for which direct performance data are
presented in Chap. 10. However, it should be kept in mind that complete
geometrical similarity also applies to such secondary features as surface rough￾ness, and therefore extrapolation to very great changes in surface size may
introduce some additional uncertainty into the performance data. Note that the
dimensional data are given in both English and SI units.
In addition to the tube banks shown in Fig. 9-2, data are also presented in
Chap. 10 (Figs. 10-11, 10-15, and 10-16) for other staggered and in-line
arrangements from the extensive data of Grimison [1).
In Figs. 9-3 to 9-9 are shown diagrams of a great many surfaces of the plate-fin
type. The plate-fin surfaces are especially useful where both fluids in the heat
exchanger are gases, since extended surface can be effectively employed on both
fluid sides. With the plate-fin construction it is possible to achieve a very large
area compactness or heat transfer area per unit of volume. Flexibility in heat
exchanger design is possible because the two fluid sides are independent of one
another and the most suitable type of extended surface can be chosen for each of
the fluids. This is not possible with the circular-tube-bank surfaces where, for
example, the choice of flow normal to a bank of tubes for one fluid automatically
fixes the flow geometry for the other fluid, with nearly the same heat transfer
area on both sides.
The surface configurations shown in Figs. 9-3 to 9-9 represent most of the
common types in present use, any two of which could be built together into a
heat exchanger core using the sandwich type of assembly shown. The plate-fin

158 Compact Heat Exchangers
surfaces have been further subdivided into plain-fin, louvered-fin, strip-fin,
pin-fin, wavy-fin, and perforated-fin types.
The plain-fin surfaces are characterized by long uninterrupted flow passages,
with performance similar to that obtained inside long circular tubes. There is,
however, a decided tube-length effect on both the heat transfer and friction
performance, and the length to hydraulic-diameter ratio L/4rh is indicated on
each of the surface diagrams. The length L is not necessarily the flow length of
the total heat exchanger but is rather the flow length of uninterrupted fin; the
actual heat exchanger flow length may involve several flow lengths of fin mate￾rial placed end to end. Unless absolutely perfect alignment is obtained, the
surface will behave as if there were a new hydrodynamic and thermal entry
length, and in commercial heat exchangers no attempt is usually made to obtain
perfect alignment. Note that the plain-fin surfaces include rectangular passages,
triangular passages, and passages with rounded and reentry corners, so that
there is considerably more variation in geometry than in the summary correla￾tion curves in Chap. 7 where only plain-fin surfaces with rectangular flow
passages are considered. Note that some ofthe triangular-passage surfaces are of
a double-passage construction, which is a scheme that provides the heat ex￾changer designer with a method for obtaining flexibility in relative flow area, hot
and cold sides, while still using a common fin dimension.
The semidescriptive method of designating plain-fin surfaces refers to the
number of fins per inch transverse to the flow direction. Thus surface 14.77 has
14.77 fins per inch. The additional letter T indicates the surfaces with definite
triangular passages.
The louvered-fin surfaces are characterized by fins that have been cut and
bent out into the flow stream at frequent intervals. The purpose oflouvering is to
break up the boundary layers so as to yield higher heat transfer coefficients than
are possible with plain fins under the same flow conditions. As a general rule, the
more frequent the interruption, the higher the conductance, although the
friction factor is also increased. The resulting improvement in heat transfer
versus friction-power behavior is discussed in Chap. 1.
The louvered-fin surfaces are designated by two figures. The first refers to the
length of the louvered fin in the flow direction, the second to the fins per inch
transverse to the flow. Thus surface ~-1.1 has louvers and 11.1 fins per
inch.
The strip-fin surfaces are similar in principle to the louvered-fin surfaces, the
only difference being that the short sections offins are aligned entirely with the
flow direction. With the strip-fin configuration it is feasible to have very short
flow-length fins and thus very high heat transfer coefficients. The experimental
uncertainty for the strip-fin surfaces is probably somewhat greater than for any
of the other surfaces because the performance, and most especially the friction
performance, is materially affected by the thickness and character of the fin
leading edge. Fins of this type are generally constructed by a machine-cutting
process that inevitably leaves a slightly bent and scarfed fin edge that differs
depending upon the fin material and the character of the cutting tool. Since a
few ten-thousandths of an inch of scarfing can have a considerable effect, it is
difficult to either dimensionally describe this effect or to exactly duplicate one of

Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 159
the test surfaces. In the captions to the direct-test-data curves in Chap. 10 for
the strip-fin surfaces, the fin material used for the test surfaces is indicated,
because a soft material, such as aluminum, may be expected to yield fin edges
somewhat different than would be obtained from a hard material, such as
stainless steel. Most of the fins of the test surfaces were of aluminum construc￾tion, and although this by no means precludes the use of the performance data
for steel fins, it does suggest some conservatism in design. Briggs and London [4
or 5] touch on this point.
The designation scheme for the strip-fin surfaces is essentially the same as
that used for the louvered surfaces.
The wavy-fin surfaces are also high-performance surfaces with performance
quite similar to the louvered and strip-fin surfaces. The change in flow direction
induced by the fins caused boundary-layer separation with effects similar to
complete fin interruption. The wavy-fin surfaces are designated by two figures,
giving the number of fins per inch and the wavelength, followed by the letter W.
Thus surface 11.5 -tW has U.5 fins per inch and a complete wave every tin.
Pin-fin surfaces are another example of the plate-fin system, where the
purpose is to achieve very high heat transfer coefficients by maintaining thin
boundary layers on the fins. By constructing the fins from small-diameter wire,
the effective flow length of the fins can be very small indeed. The pin-fin surfaces
are, however, characterized by quite high friction factors attributable primarily
to form drag associated with the boundary-layer separation that occurs on the
pins. Nevertheless, the very high heat transfer coefficients attainable often more
than offset the high friction factors when the final heat exchanger design is
considered. The designation scheme for the pin-fin surfaces is not descriptive.
One perforated-fin surface is described, designated simply by the number of
fins per inch transverse to the flow and the letter P. Holes cut out of the fins again
provide boundary-layer interruption. The friction factors for this surface are
quite low, suggesting that there is very little form drag induced, but there are
unfortunately insufficient data on this kind of surface to draw much in the way of
general conclusions.
The dimensional information given in Table 9-3 provides all that is necessary,
in addition to the basic heat transfer and flow-friction data in Chap. 10, to apply
the plate-fin surfaces to heat exchanger design. It will be noted that the heat
transfer area density is given as p, the area per unit of volume between the plates
on one flow side. This is not area per unit of total heat exchanger volume,
because the latter depends also upon which particularsurface isincorporated on
the other side. In Chap. 2 are given some useful geometrical relations which can
be used with the information of Table 9-3 to determine the total area density, as
well as the free-flow to frontal-area ratio of the heat exchanger.
Extrapolation of the plate-fin performance data to surfaces possessing a
superficial geometrical similarity but different hydraulic diameter can probably
be accomplished without introducing serious uncertainty for moderate changes
in hydraulic diameter. For the plain-fin surfaces, this has already in effect been
suggested in the generalized performance curves of Chap. 7. For the various
interrupted-fin surfaces, the uncertainty is greater because of the proportionally
greater influence of such factors as the cleanliness of the fin leading and trailing

160 Compact Heat Exchangers
edges and fin root connections. An aerodynamically cleaner surface is generally
obtained in the larger-scale than in the smaller-scale surfaces.
If the original scale is maintained but fins of different thicknesses are used,
there will be little effect on the nondimensional performance of the plain-fin
surfaces but an increasingly important effect on louvered- and strip-fin perform￾ances. It should also be noted that changing fin thickness for any of the surfaces
affects free-flow area and hydraulic diameter. Thus the dimensional information
in the tables must be altered accordingly.
Figures 9-10 to 9-13 show diagrams of 21 surfaces of the finned-tube type.
The finned-tube surfaces are commonly employed where one ofthe fluids in the
heat exchanger is a gas and the other is a liquid. Since gases characteristically
tend to operate with lower heat transfer coefficients than liquids, more area is
required on the gas side of the surface for a balanced design. The finned-tube
surfaces satisfy this requirement.
Three fundamental types of finned-tube surfaces are considered: (1) circular
tubes with integral circular spiraled fins, (2) circular tubes with continuous fins,
and (3) finned flat tubes. In order to present as complete a picture as possible,
some of what are believed to be the more reliable data in the literature have
been included, in addition to the data obtained on this project. In this category
are the data of Jameson [2] on finned circular tubes and data obtained by the
Trane Company [3] on circular tubes with continuous fins.
Again, a semi descriptive surface designation scheme is employed. The letters
CF refer to circular fins; otherwise, the fins may be assumed to be continuous.
The first numerals refer to the number offins per inch; the second (if any) refer
either to the nominal outside diameter ofthe tube in the case ofcircular tubes, or
the tube dimension in the flow direction in the case offlat tubes.
The dimensional data on all the finned-tube surfaces are contained in Table
9-4. Since the basic heat transfer and flow-friction design data in Chap. 10 are in
generalized nondimensional form, they are presumably applicable to surfaces of
different sizes than the original test surfaces, but again complete geometrical
similarity must be maintained if the surfaces are to be scaled up or down. No
attempt has been made to generalize the correlations to the point where varia￾tions in the nondimensional geometry can be handled.
All the fins on the finned-circular-tube surfaces are of the continuous-spi￾raled-fin type. However, the basic performance data presented will probably
not differ markedly for separate disk fins.
Figures 9-14 to 9-18 show six types of matrix surfaces. Figure 9-14 shows a
series of matrices formed by stacked crossed rods. Staggered, in-line, and
randomly stacked rods with perfect stacking (each row touching) have been
tested, and the geometrical data on seven patterns considered are tabulated in
Table 9-5. The corresponding direct test data are given in Figs. 10-98 to 10-100
in Chap. 10 and in Table 10-10.
Performance data on the randomly stacked woven-screen matrix (Fig. 9-15)
are not tabulated or graphed in Chap. 10, and thus detailed geometrical data are
not given in this chapter. However, correlations oftests ofwoven-screen matri￾ces are presented in Chap. 7, based on a number ofsources described in Chap. 7.

Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 161
Matrices can also be constructed using the plate-fin scheme. Figure 9-16
shows an example which is essentially a very compact strip-fin surface. The only
difference is that the fins are attached to the base plates by mechanical pressure
rather than by brazing, since there is no necessity that the joints be heat-con￾ducting. The result is that there is no fillet in the flow passage corners, and this
has some effect on performance. The surface designation for this matrix is
nondescriptive.
Figure 9-17 shows two examples of glass ceramic matrices [6, 7]. Besides
being made of a material that is usable at quite high temperatures, these
matrices can be constructed with extremely high area compactness. They have
the further virtue that the thermal conductivity of the ceramic material can be
very low, which is important in high-performance counterflow heat exchangers
where longitudinal heat conduction can be of critical importance (see Chap. 2).
(Note that the strip-fin construction described in the previous paragraph also has
the virtue of an interrupted longitudinal conduction path.) Again the surface
designation is nondescriptive.
Another matrix surface is that formed by randomly stacked spheres (Fig.
9-18). Again, a correlation of data from a number of sources is presented in
Chap. 7, and no geometrical data are given in this chapter because the perform￾ance data presented are not the direct measured performance of a particular
defined surface. However, since only a single pair of performance curves is
proposed for a randomly stacked bed of spheres, the coordinates of these curves
are tabulated in Chap. 10.
The matrix surfaces are characterized by a potential for very high area
compactness and by high heat transfer coefficients. Typical uses ofsuch surfaces
might be in periodic-flow heat exchangers (see Chap. 2), as fuel elements in
nuclear reactors, and as energy-storage devices in gas blow-down systems.
REFERENCES
1. Grimison, E. D.: Correlation and Utilization of New Data on Flow Resistance and Heat
Transfer for Cross-flow of Gases over Tube Banks, Trans. ASME, vol. 59, 1937.
2. Jameson, S. L.: Tube Spacing in Finned-tube Banks, Trans. ASME, vol. 67, 1945.
3. Extended Surface Heat Transfer Equipment (as corrected), Trane Company Bulletin
DS-378, March, 1953, The Trane Company, LaCrosse, Wise.
4. Briggs, D. C. and A. L. London: The Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of
Five Offset Rectangular and Six Plain Triangular Plate-fin Heat Transfer Surfaces,
Trans. Intern. Heat Transfer Con! 1961, Paper 14, p. 122, ASME.
5. Briggs, D. C., and A. L. London: The Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics of
Five Offset Rectangular and Six Plain Triangular Plate-fin Heat Transfer Surfaces, Tech.
Rept 49, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, November,
1960.
6. London, A. L., M. B. O. Young, and J. H. Stang: Glass Ceramic Surfaces, Straight
Triangular Passages-Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Characteristics, Trans. ASME,
vol. 92, 1970.
7. London, A. L., and R. K. Shah: Glass Ceramic Hexagonal and Circular Passage Surfaces
- Heat Transfer and Flow Friction Design Characteristics, Trans. SAE, vol. 82 p. 425,
1973.

162 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 9-1 Surface Geometry, Flow Inside Circular and Flattened Circular Tubes
Minimum free-flow
Surface Hydraulic diameter 4r, Test core area per tube
designation Type (L/4r,)
ft in 10-'m ft" lO-6m"
ST-I Circular 0.01925 0.231 5.867 79.2 0.0002908 27.016
FT-I Flattened 0.01433 0.1719 4.368 - 0.0002195 20.392
FTD-I Flattened, 0.01116 0.1338 3.399 - 0.000169 15.701
dimpled

-Q'l
Table 9-2 Surface Geometry, Flow Normal to Banks of BareTubes
Tube diameter Transverse spacing
Longitudinal Hydraulic diameter Heat transfer areal
Surface spacing 4Th Free-flowIfromal total volume a
Pattern Type of tests designation area a
ft 10-'m ft IO-'m ft IO-'m ft 1O-'m ft'lft' m'/m'
S 1.50-1.25(s) Staggered Steady state 0.02085 6.350 0.03125 9.525 0.02605 7.938 0.0166 5.029 0.333 80.3 263.5
S 1.50-1.25 Staggered Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.04688 14.288 0.0391 11.908 0.0248 7.569 0.333 53.4 175.2
S 1.25-1.25 Staggered Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.0391 11.908 0.0391 11.908 0.0125 3.810 0.200 64.4 211.3
S 1.50- 1.00 Staggered Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.04688 14.288 0.03125 9.525 0.0199 6.071 0.333 67.1 220.1
S 1.50-1.50 Staggered Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.04688 14.288 0.04688 14.288 0.0298 9.093 0.333 44.8 147.0
S 2.00-1.00 Staggered Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.0625 19.050 0.03125 9.525 0.0327 9.957 0.414 50.3 165.0
S 2.50-0.75 Staggered Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.0782 23.813 0.02344 7.145 0.0271 8.255 0.366 53.6 175.9
1 1.50-1.25(s) In line Steady state 0.02085 6.350 0.03125 9.525 0.02605 7.938 0.0166 5.029 0.338 80.4 263.8
1 1.50-1.25 In line Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.04688 14.288 0.0391 11.908 0.0248 7.569 0.333 53.6 175.9
1 1.25-1.25 In line Transient 0.03125 9.525 0.0391 11.908 0.0391 11.908 0.01237 3.767 0.200 64.4 211.3
FT-2 Staggered Steady state Flattened See surface diagrams 0.01433 4.374 0.386 108 354.3
FTD-2 Staggered Steady state Flattened See surface diagrams 0.0160 4.877 0.423 108 354.3

-
Table 9-3 Surface Geometry, Plate-Fin Surfaces
(a) Plain fins
Plate spacing Hydraulic diameter Flow length of
Heat transfer areal
Fin thickness t5 volume between Surface b
Fins/In 4r, uninterrupted fin plates ji Fin areal
designation total area
ft IO-'m ft IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m ft'lft' m'/m'
2.0 0.0625 19.05 2.0 0.0474 14.45 0.032 0.813 12.0 304.8 76.1 249.7 0.606
3.01 0.0625 19.05 3.01 0.03546 10.82 0.032 0.813 12.0 304.8 98.3 322.5 0.706
3.97 0.0625 19.05 3.97 0.0282 8.59 0.032 0.813 12.0 304.8 119.4 391.7 0.766
4.00 0.015 4.57 See surface 0.0150 4.57 See surface 18.0 457.2 See surface 0.500 diagrams diagrams diagrams
5.3 0.0392 11.94 5.3 0.02016 6.15 0.006 0.152 2.49 63.2 188 616.8 0.719
6.2 0.0337 10.29 6.2 0.0182 5.54 0.010 0.254 1.20 30.5 204 669.3 0.728
9.03 0.0686 20.90 9.03 0.01522 4.64 0.008 0.203 1.19 30.2 244 800.5 0.888
11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.08 0.006 0.152 2.50 63.5 367 1204.0 0.756
I 1.1 l(a) 0.0400 12.19 11.11 0.01153 3.52 0.008 0.203 8.00 203.2 312 1023.6 0.854
14.77 0.0275 8.38 14.77 0.00848 2.59 0.006 0.152 2.51 63.8 420 1378.0 0.844
15.08 0.0348 10.62 15.08 0.00876 2.67 0.006 0.152 6.84 173.7 414 1358.3 0.870
19.86 0.0208 6.35 19.86 0.00615 1.875 0.006 0.152 2.51 63.8 561 1840.6 0.849
10.27T 0.0453 13.82 10.27 0.01259 3.84 0.010 0.254 5.0 127.0 289.9 951.1 0.863
11.94T 0.0207 6.33 11.94 0.009396 2.86 0.006 0.152 5.0 127.0 393.0 1289.4 0.769
12.00T 0.0208 6.35 12.00 0.009412 2.87 0.006 0.152 2.5 63.5 392.7 1288.4 0.773
16.96T 0.0213 6.50 16.96 0.005652 1.722 0.006 0.152 5.0 127.0 607.8 1994.1 0.861
25.79T 0.0170 5.18 25.79 0.003771 1.151 0.006 0.152 2.5 63.5 855.6 2807.1 0.884
30.33T 0.0287 8.76 30.33 0.004009 1.222 0.006 0.152 2.5 63.5 812.5 2665.7 0.928
46.45T 0.00833 2.54 46.45 0.002643 0.805 0.002 0.051 2.63 66.8 1332.5 4371.7 0.837

-0')
(b) Louvered fins
Plate spacing Hydraulic Fin thickness .5 Louver spacing Louver gap
Heat transfer area/
Surface b diameter 4r, volume between plates P Fin area/ Fins/in designation total area
ft IO-'m ft IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m ft' /ft' m'/m'
i-6.06 0.0208 6.35 6.06 0.01460 4.453 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.525 0.055 1.397 256 840 0.640
i(a)-6.06 0.0208 6.35 6.06 0.01460 4.453 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.525 0.130 3.302 256 840 0.640
!-6.06 0.0208 6.35 6.06 0.01460 4.453 0.006 0.152 0.500 12.70 0.055 1.397 256 840 0.640
!(a)-6.06 0.0208 6.35 6.06 0.01460 4.453 0.006 0.152 0.500 12.70 0.130 3.302 256 840 0.640
i-8.7 0.0208 6.35 8.7 0.01196 3.650 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.525 0.055 1.397 307 1007 0.705
i(a)-8.7 0.0208 6.35 8.7 0.01196 3.650 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.525 0.080 2.032 307 1007 0.705
"'-11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.1875 4.763 0.055 1.397 367 1204 0.756
i-11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.250 6.350 0.035 1.397 367 1204 0.756
i(b)-11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.250 6.350 0.055 1.397 367 1204 0.756
i-11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.525 0.055 1.397 367 1204 0.756
i(b)-11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.525 0.055 1.397 367 1204 0.756
1- 11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.500 12.70 0.055 1.397 367 1204 0.756
i-11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.750 19.05 0.040 1.016 367 1204 0.756
i(b)-11.1 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.084 0.006 0.152 0.750 19.05 0.040 1.016 367 1204 0.756
(continued)

I-'
O'l
O'l
Table 9-3 Surface Geometry, Plate-Fin Surfaces (continued)
(c) Strip fins
Plate spacing Hydraulic diameter Flow length of
Heat transfer areal
Fin thickness & volume between Surface b
Finslin 4r, uninterrupted fin platesp Fin areal
designation total area
ft IO-'m ft IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m ft'/ft' m'/m'
t(s)-II.I 0.0208 6.35 11.1 0.01012 3.08 0.006 0.152 0.25 6.35 367 1204 0.756
t-15.2 0.0346 10.55 15.2 0.00868 2.65 0.006 0.152 0.125 3.175 417 1368 0.873
t-13.95 0.0313 9.54 13.95 0.00879 2.68 0.010 0.254 0.125 3.175 381 1250 0.840
t-15.61 0.0208 6.35 15.61 0.007812 2.38 0.004 0.102 0.125 3.175 472 1548 0.809
t-19.86 0.00817 2,49 19.86 0.00506 1.54 0.004 0.102 0.125 3.175 687 2254 0.785
t-22.68 0.0251 7.65 22.68 0.00569 1.74 0.004 0.102 0.111 2.80 631 2069 0.885
t-25.01 0.0167 5.08 25.01 0.00491 1.50 0.004 0.102 0.111 2.80 719 2360 0.850
t-24.12 0.00625 1.91 24.12 0.00397 1.21 0.004 0.102 0.111 2.80 863 2830 0.665
n,-27.03 0.0208 6.35 27.03 0.00467 1.42 0.004 0.102 0.100 2.54 752 2466 0.887
n,-19.35 0.00625 1.91 19.35 0.00460 1,40 0.004 0.102 0.100 2.54 759 2490 0.611
n,-19.74 0.00423 1.29 19.74 0.00400 1.22 0.002 0.051 0.100 2.54 923 3028 0.508
f,--12.2 0.0404 12.3 12.2 0.01120 3,41 0.004 0.102 0.094 2,40 340 1115 0.862
t-11.94(D) 0.0198 6.02 11.94 0.007436 2.27 0.006 0.152 0.500 12.7 461 1512 0.796
t-15,4(D) 0.0172 5.23 15,4 0.00527 1.61 0.006 0.152 0.250 6.35 642 2106 0.816
t-12.18(D) 0.0294 8.97 12.18 0.008848 2.70 0.004 0.102 0.178 4.52 422 1385 0.847
t- 15.75(D) 0.0253 7.72 15.75 0.006790 2.07 0.004 0.102 0.143 3.63 526 1726 0.859
t-16.00(D) 0.0212 6,48 16.00 0.006112 1.86 0.006 0.152 0.125 3.175 550 1804 0.845
t-16.12(D) 0.0172 5.23 16.12 0.00509 1.55 0.006 0.152 0.125 3.175 660 2165 0.823
t-19.82(D) 0.0171 5.21 19.82 0.005049 1.54 0.004 0.102 0.125 3.175 680 2231 0.841
t-20.06(D) 0.0167 5.11 20.06 0.004892 1.49 0.004 0.102 0.125 3.175 698 2290 0.843
t-16.12(T) 0.0261 7.98 16.12 0.00514 1.57 0.006 0.152 0.125 3.175 650 2133 0.882

-a'l
--:t
(d) Wavy fins
Plate Hydraulic Double Heat transfer
Surface spacing diameter Fin thickness .5 Wavelength wave area/volume Fin area/
designation b Fins/in 4r, amplitude between plates p
total area
ft IO-'m ft IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m ft'/ft' m'/m'
11.44-iW 0.0345 10.49 11.44 0.01060 3.23 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.53 0.0775 1.97 351 1152 0.847
11.5-tW 0.0313 9.53 11.5 0.00993 3.02 0.010 0.254 0.375 9.53 0.078 1.98 345 1138 0.822
17.8-iW 0.0345 10.49 17.8 0.00696 2.12 0.006 0.152 0.375 9.53 0.0775 1.97 514 1686 0.892
(e) Pin fins
Plate Hydraulic Transverse Longitudinal Heat transfer
Surface spacing diameter Pin diameter. pin spacing pin spacing area/volume Fin area/
designation b Pin pattern 4r, between plates p total area
ft IO-'m ft IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m ft'/ft' m'/m'
AP-I 0.020 6.10 In-line 0.01444 4.40 0.040 1.02 0.125 3.18 0.125 3.18 188 617 0.512
AP-2 0.0332 10.1 In-line 0.01172 3.58 0.040 1.02 0.12 3.05 0.096 2.44 204 669 0.686
PF-3 0.0625 19.1 In-line 0.00536 1.636 0.031 0.79 0.062 1.53 0.062 1.53 339 1112 0.834
PF-4(F) 0.0418 12.75 Staggered 0.0186 5.66 0.065 1.65 0.199 5.06 0.125 3.18 140 459 0.704
PF-9(F) 0.0425 12.95 In-line 0.0297 9.04 0.065 1.65 0.238 6.05 0.196 4.98 96.2 316 0.546
PF-IO(F) 0.0367 lU8 In-line 0.01426 4.34 0.063 X 0.021 1.6 X 0.53 0.090 2.29 0.110 2.79 214 702 0.693
(1) Perforated fins
Plate Hydraulic Heat transfer
spacing diameter Fin thickness .5 Hole diameter Hole spacing area/volume
Surface between plates Fin areal
b Fins/in 4r, designation p total area
ft IO-'m ft 10-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m in 10-'m ft'/ft' m'/m'
13.95(P) 0.0167 5.08 12.95 0.00822 2.50 0.012 0.305 0.079 2.0 32 4.96 X 10" 381 1250 0.705

-Q')
00
Table 9-4 Surface Geometry,Flow Normal to Banks of Finned Tubes
(a) Circular tubes, circular fins
Fin outside Transverse Longitudinal Hydraulic Free-flow/
Heat transfer area/
Surface Tube Tube diameter diameter tube sparing tube spacing tliameler 4r.. Fin thickness 6 total volume c:r Ymarea/
Finatm frontal
designation arrangement ~are
in 10-'m in 10-'m in Ia-'m in lo-'m ft W-sm in ·IO-sm area" ft"/ft' m"/m'
CF-7.34 Staggered 0.38 9.65 0.92 23.4 0.975 24.8 0.800 20.3 7.34 0.0154 4.75 0.018 0.46 0.538 140 459 0.892
CF-8.72 Staggered 0.38 9.65 0.92 23.4 0.975 24.8 0.800 20.3 8.72 0.01288 3.93 0.018 0.46 0.524 163 535 0.910
CF-8.72(c) Staggered 0.42 10.67 0.861 21.9 0.975 24.8 0.800 20.3 8.72 0.01452 4.43 0.019 0.48 0.494 136 446 0.876
CF-11.46 Staggered 0.38 9.65 0.92 23.4 0.975 24.8 0.800 20.3 11.46 0.00976 2.98 0.016 0.41 0.510 209 686 0.931
CF-7.0-ij Staggered 0.645 16.38 1.121 28.5 1.232 31.5 1.35 34.3 7.0 0.0219 6.68 0.010 0.25 0.449 82 269 0.830
CF-8.7 -ij(a) Staggered 0.645 Hi-38 1.121 28.5 1.232 31.3 1.35 34.3 8.7 0.01797 5.48 0.010 0.25 0.443 98.7 324 0.862
CF-8.7-ij(b) Staggered 0.645 16.38 1.121 28.5 1.848 46.9 1.55 34.3 8.7 0.383 11.67 0.010 0.25 0.628 65.7 216 0.862
CF-9.05-:-U(a) Staggered 0.774 19.66 1.463 37.2 1.557 39.5 1.75 44.5 9.05 0.01681 5.13 0.012 0.31 0.455 108 354 0.917
CF-9.05-U(b) Staggered 0.774 19.66 1.463 37.2 1.982 50.3 1.75 44.5 9.05 0.02685 8.18 0.012 0.31 0.572 85.1 279 0.917
CF -9.05-U(c) Staggered 0.774 19.66 1.463 37.2 2.725 69.2 1.75 44.5 9.05 0.0445 13.59 0.012 0.31 0.688 61.9 203 0.917
CF -9.05-U(d) Staggered 0.774 19.66 1.463 37.2 2.725 62.9 0.80 20.3 9.05 0.01587 4.85 0.012 0.31 0.537 135 443 0.917
CF - 9.05 -U(e) Staggered 0.774 19.66 1.463 37.2 1.982 50.3 1.375 34.9 9.05 0.02108 6.43 0.012 0.31 0.572 108 354 0.917
CF -8:8-1.0-J(a) Staggered 1.024 26.0 1.737 44.1 1.959 49.8 2.063 52.4 8.8 0.01927 5.89 0.012 0.31 0.439 91.2 299 0.825
CF -8.8-1.0-J(b) Staggered 1.024 26.0 1.737 44.1 3.079 78.2 2.063 52.4 8.8 0.0443 13.21 0.012 0.31 0.642 58.1 191 0.825

....
Q)
'"
(b) Circular lubes. continuous fins
Tube diameter
Hydraulic diameter.
Fin thickness s Free-flow/ Heat transfer areal
Surface Tube 4r, total volume a
Fin type Fins/in frontal Fin area/
designation arrangement total area
in IO-'m ft IO-'m in 10-' area (J ft'/ft' m2/rn'
8.0-iT Staggered 0.402 10.21 Plain 8.0 0.01192 3.63 0.013 0.33 0.534 179 587 0.913
7.75-iT Staggered 0.676 17.17 Plain 7.75 0.0114 3.48 0.016 0.41 0.481 169 554 0.950
(c) Flat tubes, continuous fins
Tube length Tube width Hydraulic diameter
Free flow/ Heat transfer areal
Surface Tube (parallel to flow) (normal to flow) 4r, Fin thickness <5 total volume Q Fin area/ Fin type Fins/in frontal designation arrangement total area
in 10-'m in 10-'m ft IO-'m in IO-'m area zr ft'/ft' m2/m'
9.68-0.87 In-line Plain 0.870 22.1 0.120 3.0 9.68 0.01180 3.60 0.004 0.102 0.697 229 751 0.795
9.1-0.737S Staggered Plain 0.737 18.7 0.100 2.5 9.1 0.01380 4.21 0.004 0.102 0.788 224 735 0.813
9.68-0.87R In-line Ruffled 0.870 22.1 D.120 .0 9.68 .01180 .60 p.004 P·102 p.697 ~29 51 0.795
9.21-0.737SR Staggered Ruffled 0.737 18.7 0.100 2.5 9.29 0.01352 4.12 0.004 0.102 0.788 228 748 0.814
11.32-0.737SR Staggered Ruffled 0.737 18.7 0.100 2.5 11.32 0.01152 3.51 0.004 0.102 0.780 270 886 0.845

---t
o
Table 9-5 Surface Geometry, Flow Through Crossed-Rod Matricest
Rod diameter Transverse Hydraulic radius Free-flow." Heat transfer areal
Matrix Porosity d
pitch r, frontal total volume ex
no. p
X, in 10-' ft IO-'m area a
ft 2
/ ft' m2/m'
1 0.832 0.375 9.53 4.675 0.0387 11.80 0.618 21.5 70.5
2 0.817 0.375 9.53 4.292 0.0349 10.64 0.588 23.4 76.8
3 0.766 0.375 9.53 3.356 0.0256 7.80 0.493 30.0 98.4
4 0.725 0.375 9.53 2.856 0.0206 6.28 0.422 35.2 115.5
5 0.675 0.375 9.53 2.417 0.0162 4.94 0.344 41.6 136.5
6 0.602 0.375 9.53 1.974 0.0118 3.60 0.243 50.9 167.0
7 0.500 0.375 9.53 1.571 0.00781 2.30 0.132 64.0 210.0
t Applicable to in-line, staggered, or random stacking.

.....
""-l
.....
Table 9-6 Surface Geometry, Plate-Fin Matrix
Hydraulic Flow length Heat transfer Total heat transfer
Matrix Plate spacing b Fins/in diameter Fin thickness, <5 of uninter- area/volume Porosity Plate thickness area/total
no. 4Th rupted fin between platesP p volume c<
ft IO-'m ft IO-'m in IO-'m in IO-'m ft'/ft' m'/m' in IO-'m ft'/ft' m'/m'
50lMon 0.00218 0.665 35.74 0.001885 0.575 0.001 0.0254 0.05 1.27 1976 6,483 0.896 0.001 0.0254 1,902 6,240

....
""-t
l-Q
Table 9-7 Glass Ceramic Matrices
Passage count
Hydraulic diameter Heat transfer areal
Matrix Porosity 4T, L/4T,
total volume a
no. p
I/in' I/m' ft 1O-'m ft2/ft' m2/m'
505A 0.794 526 815,300 0.00247 0.753 101 1,285 4,216
519 0.811 1,683 2,608,655 0.00197 0.600 127 1,646 5,400

Fig. 9-1 Tubular surfaces.
Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 173
L/4rh" 79.2
ST-I
FT-2
,64" ,,£ DEPTH .14" .. ,234" 1'11'1 0 I-V. • C .u 4 r1 3- "'.' .i.~ •.•
360" • -'C Iz.-I:'"
0&0 C-¢-C .302"
FTO-I
415" _~
r--- >.60" --------j
I-r-l/iJ
03" DIMPLE DEPTH
FTO-2

:i Fig. 9-2 Tubular surfaces.
1-1.50-1.25
H25-1.25
",R
FLOW -+--Ht...JL
3'
8
_
0)50'
FLOW xi2
t , f'
--jX{I!s-200-1.00
-~r ~l sO.75
rh!A4;i
~i"
FLOW
5-1.50-1.50
TRANSIENT TESTS
•
, 1
1- 5f1•..I
AIR 1&
--.-u;w . t-
. ><"'" V . /
•
5-150-125
STEADY STATE TESTS
•
";1.-- .....
,.+.;- . .1..
--ttT, .l￾AIR - 8
-,;:ovr- __T
5-150-125(5)
IS TUliBE ROWS i'
" ---'---
"" ..SO
-+ ---r
FLOW • • .--L
0.375"
. -.-
0.3125" Xl=t.25
I- 1.50 -1.25(5)

Fig, 9-3 Plate-fin surfaces, plain fins,
Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 175
L/4rh
=21'1
2,0
,
0'400"
I
I
L￾f4-0'75" -l
3,01
T:
------------- 0.x.: :,
----.----.-- - 0·225
L.
-, 0·190·
L
3,97

176 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 9-4 Plate-fin surfaces, plain fins.
"""00 I C.·-.-.] 0,18' "
L/4'I\'IOO I L.. 018"";
'0
L/4'h =20.6
--=- 2 __
~.2.f-.5'1 +:=§J
III
L/4 rh -10.3
~I=-~-=­ a -----
5.3
itt 1-0.47~
11.11(0)
1986
14.7
• L/4'h' 24.7
I---
9.03
f: •
L/4 rh ' 5 5 f-040!1"-1
6.2

Fig. 9·4 (continued)
L /4r =16.6 h
-.---====
.1947"
lO.27T
l/4r :44.4
t h
Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 177
.204"
Ll4r 055.3
~:h_:,_ =lM
,
.0775" 25.79T -
L/4r e 52 1;,345~1 h
ll * , "
:: ','
30.33T
+
.1675"
11.94T
L/4rll =83.0
I
,
.0431"
46.45T
.100"
i
L/4r
h
: 73.8
~-:-
~- -
.1179"
16.96T
.256 "
..

3/4-11.1
~04" _¥r 0 05" __~'25"
~-_.
._ - -=f'_
.-- --' ~;5" -I -,
r
2 5"1
.
:..
3/4(b)-Il.1
Fig. 9-5 Plate-fin surfaces, louvered fins.
00
,-OliO" 0.055"
-
1-0,25'"
3/8-6,06
L-:~130"O~5" -i~f-
~, "
r-- --I.m"
3/8(0)- 6.06
t-~\i2~
It) ---=--=:::r: --===::::::I -
r--+-.~- f--'50"---j :
1/2-6.06
.~,5~m·2~
~~-
l - - .
1/2(0)- 6.06
0.25"
o ___________ =r-- .
0375
3/8 - 8.7
L 375"..J ~25'-1
3/8(0)- 87
f- 25"-1
035"0,55" ~.
~~ -~
f~~ '.
-I1875M
I- '
3/16-11,1
~. +it,t-'2~."'"i
~I~, ,
l-.25,J
1/4-11.1
r-<l25"-j
"
lJ) ~
00,55"_
_______
_ it
d -r -....---.-:.=:=-
'1--'0.25''-1 - - --. -,
1/4(bJ-11I
025"
0, -O~.lO. ~uo5':" ~F,.=1
~B:~: :-.:
0375"
3/8-11 I
035 M
T-' 7
- --.-.,
-_.~ ~-~
.I~ __ ~025· ...
,-------_.----=::.:...... __._. -~'
I--.50·-----J L
1/2 -11,/

Fig. 9-6 Plate-fin surfaces, strip fins.
i
.072" 1~'r 1 .375" r-
*
1/9-22.68
-II/fit- ~09~
ao50·~ I
1/8-19.86
i"
1/8-19.82(0)
.125"
-.-LV
,-
.0505" =-
.125" .20'"
=*= -1 to- i
.0499"
.353"
iim...
1/8 - 16.00(0)
1/7 - 15.75 (0)
1/6 -12.18(0)
.125M
.255"
-L-LJ-I---l
0625"
.--=- m
~'y ,.304"1
-,--
.0635" =~
.178·
-Lir
,--=
.0821 M=:=
i
"""-'1]
1;0;';'""-
-J vlo/-
IllO-19.74
.. -
1/10-19.35
00
516""""1. ==
1/2-11.94(0)
3/32 - 12.22
.0838" .500" .237"
C
1
t"--485'--I
0082-T =_=_ rn
--1 0 .3 0 1' t￾07~O·
:If
119-24.12
00415",
,
--1
1
° 20($1-
- .. "."
- -.---
040~ =~i'-
1/9-25.01
1/9'
--i t--
0044l =
T
1/8 -13.95
1/4(5)-11.1
£035' . ;0055'
al~---':'-'~
.-- -'-025~ .--.
I"
.066"_L _ 18 i
r-= -
-
APPRor--
1/8-15.2
1/8 - 20.06(0)
-'0
118' _-10250't--
"",,-1
j
,. -
ta
1/8-15.61
1/10'
0.037'1. ~
T--
/{l250~
liS
01,. __
T
j-4"15.4(Q)
[""'-"1
ffiB.. --
.l..
06l'·'_- .. __ '-= :..::
1/8-16.12(DI
.,'''., r ,.... -j
.l_-~
o~r-=
1/8 -16.12(T)
1/10- 27.03

Fig.9-7 Plate-fin surfaces, wavy fins.
1--
1' ----< m13' T~ ,
11.44
- 3/8
w
0[62"
~
t<--
r->i Itl"
-'-~
"
0775" APPROX
17.S-3/SW
L. LT
f.- o.502"--l
I 11,t-0.OSS"DlA. ~O.51O"~
_ 4-f-f- bE:
-:-t-i-i~8"
_~_ljl~-.i.
'~ 0.196" 'L O.I7~
PF 4
+J1- ~0.65" DIA.
-t)
t
-+- <1>-
---0.125"
t!"" 'J" _ . _.-.¥. ·'1 ,0. OIA '.
H-t
I~ &--41"
.H4-
lItlll'"l[·'LOWAIlU.
AP I
Fig. 9-8 Plate-fin surfaces, pin fins.
llifit-o<·· · ' ,,,'
•
'm+-
.
0.12",. .• )~,' , . s",'
-m.··· .. ".,~" AP 2
-j 375" f--
.375' I--
.078"
....
I;¥j Q
11.5-3/8W PF 9
AP IO(F)
Fig. 9-9 Plate-fin
surfaces, perforated fins.
.072" T--
:
r= =-j
~b 32 HOLES
PER IN2,
O.079·0IA
=ffik,. - m\
? -I L o)," -J I: ,,~
7'cf~
PF 3
110"
0000,
.
0000
•
0000
440"
C:>~I"
I- 063,,.jT
....0
. ,'J--
...':'
-,
13.95(Pl

Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 181
Fig. 9·10 Finned-tube surfaces, circular tubes, circular fins.
CF-II.46
CF-7.34
_1M\\-
.~.1Ii
~'f
0,"47'-1 fO,OIB"+-
CF-8.72
+ 1121,,---.a Lt. _____
+ 0,685"\;n F-lIDI:-
01429' --lr +.'0.010"
CF 7.0 -S/8J
= t $1" ~,lnlt
~23t· + t -
+ 0645"___.__
011'19" - ..H- ..j..-4 -0.010"
CF 8"7-5/8J(a)
-,
1.848"
.... L
--
--
-:1\\\& 01l49"--H- +-6 -0.010"
CF 8.7-5I8J(b)

182 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 9-11 Finned-tube surfaces, circular tubes, circular fins.
-
1\ ('\\11 \j \. \\1
iliflll1
01105"-1 ~+-cf:O.O
-
\T ~~ +it3
" ••
T 0774" .~
, ,
_
CF 9.05 -3/4J(a)
-
CF 905 -3/4J(b}
CF 9.05 -3/4J( c)
-
r
2.725" SS:2: 14 6 3
== -4ilit LL .a
- oao" 01105"--1
.•r,
*
CF 9.05 "3/4J(d)
CF 8S -I.OJ to)

Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 183
Fig. 9-11 (continued)
-
-
-
- O_1I37"~ ..
1-...4-0.012"
CF 8B-1.0J (b)
Fig. 9-12 Finned-tube surfaces, circular tubes, continuous fins.
J....:= _
\ _, -,.../1 0402" .
0125"·-0- -+d'0013"
0.866"
8.0-3I8T
,811I=
067"~­
1.75"0.'129" .,1-+6 -00164"
7.75-5/8T

184 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 9-13 Finned-tube surfaces, flat tubes, continuous fins.
0.120"
1--c::= c::=
t- 0.870"--
Q025"~
0.25"
9.68-0.87-R
0.100" ==
T*=
0.55 " = J
-'----!= OIS' \.-079"
+o.025.......j 1-0.25"
11.32 -O.737-SR
~OI20"
0.43El·1.=106"~
---i.---.F===I =
9.68 -0.87
i
.•110 088,
..II.-
m
0103'
0100" ==
G=
OSS" =
9.29-0737-SR
0.100"
055' =
-,- =SO.lS·~O.79"J Con7'-'I
9.1-0.737-S
mI-o./Id'
Fig. 9-14 Matrix surfaces, crossed-rod matrices.
RANDOM
INLINE
IN LIN E
"l" I
Xt" variable
STAGGERED
STAGGERED

Heat Transfer Surface Geometry 185
Fig. 9-15 Matrix surfaces, woven-screen matrices. See summary
curves (Figs. 7-8 and 7-9) for performance characteristics.
Fig. 9-16 Matrix surfaces, plate-fin surfaces, stacked.
,1/20"1
00271" --_._-
1
T--
00265"
---J f--
tj
fJ
MATRIX NO. 501 MOD
Fig. 9-17 Matrix surfaces, glass ceramic.
CELL BOUNDS
Fig. 9-18 Matrix surfaces, sphere ma￾trices. See summary curves (Fig. 7-10)
for performance characteristics.
.L
T
a.
CELL BOUN
___I -77\?J
:~?
~c{--
a
MATRIX NO. 505A MATRIX NO. 519

10
Heat Transfer and
Flow-Friction
Design Data
Direct test data are presented in this chapter for 132 compact heat transfer
surfaces. The geometries of the surfaces are completely described in the preced￾ing chapter. The sources ofthe data and the experimental methods are discussed
in Chap. 8. The present chapter will consist of a brief description of the tables
and graphs, followed by some comments on certain of the test results which
require more explanation.
The test data for the various configurations are presented in the same order as
the surface diagrams in Figs. 9-1 to 9-18. The surfaces may be identified by both
the designation number and the surface diagrams which appear on each of the
graphs ofbasic heat transfer and flow-friction design data. The pertinent dimen￾sional data for each of the surfaces are given in the captions to the figures. These
are the same dimensional data that are given in Tables 9-1 to 9-7.
The abscissa on each figure isthe Reynolds number, Re = 4rhG/Il.Inall cases,
except for the matrix surfaces, G is based on minimum free-flow area Ac
, and 4rh
is as defined by Eq. (1-4). For the matrix surfaces, G is based on pAfr, an
"effective" free-flow area. The ordinate is used for two parameters: (1) the
friction factor f, in all cases defined by Eq. (1-5); (2) the heat transfer parame￾ter, Stanton number times Prandtl number to the two-thirds power, StPr2
/
3 =
(h/Gcp
) (IlCp
/ k)2/3 .
The individual test points are indicated on the graphs for all the test results
obtained under the supervision ofthe authors. Test points shown as small circles
(0)were obtained during heat transfer tests (hot-core tests). Test points shown as
crosses (x) are from friction-factor tests conducted with no core heating (cold￾core tests). The discrepancy noted in some cases between the hot-core and
cold-core friction factors (see, for example, Fig. 10-1) is due to temperature-de￾pendent fluid-property effects discussed in Chap. 4
The solid lines drawn through the data points represent a best interpretation
ofthe test data. It will be noted that the StPr2
/
3 best-interpretation curve for the
steam-to-air tests lies somewhat above the test points, especially at high Reyn￾olds numbers. This arises from the fact that the test points were calculated from
the raw test data with no correction made for the thermal resistance of the
condensate layer on the steam side ofthe heat transfer surface. Before drawing

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 187
in the best-interpretation curves, a correction was made for an estimate of the
steam-side resistance, and the difference between the test points and the best￾interpretation curves represents the magnitude of this correction. Since the
steam-side resistance was generally less than 10 percent of the overall resist￾ance, only a moderately accurate estimate of this resistance was necessary. No
correction for a steam-side resistance was necessary for the test results obtained
by transient techniques; therefore, in these cases, the best-interpretation curve
is faired through the test points.
Where both hot- and cold-core friction data were obtained, the best-inter￾pretation curves are in all cases faired through the cold-core friction-factor test
points, there being no uncertainty about temperature-dependent property ef￾fects.
Figures 10-11,10-15,10-16, and 10-87 to 10-92 do not show any test data
points. The curves are plots of equations derived from the indicated sources and
do not represent data obtained under the authors' supervision. These results
have been included in this compilation in order to provide a more complete
treatment of compact heat exchanger surfaces; they represent what are believed
to be the most reliable information in the literature on the surfaces indicated.
Tables 10-1 to 10-13 are summaries of the basic heat transfer and flow-fric￾tion design data for all the surfaces tested under the authors' supervision. The
tabular summaries are taken directly from the best-interpretation curves and do
not represent test points. They are presented for the reader who may wish to
plots his or her own curves.
Certain features of the individual graphs will now be pointed out in the order
in which they appear.
In Fig. 10-12, the high Reynolds number end of the friction-factor curve is
dashed. In-line tube banks often show a marked tendency to whistle, and if the
sound is sufficiently intense, it may be reflected in increased friction factors. The
surface shown in Fig. 10-12 whistled above Re = 9,000 with an increase in
friction factor. The dashed line represents the probable course of the friction￾factor curve without whistling. Since the whistling is an acoustic phenomenon
and is affected by other factors besides the Reynolds number, those test points
markedly affected by the whistle are not considered to be significant. The
tendency to whistle may in some applications disallow the use of such surfaces
unless suitable acoustic treatments are developed [1, 2). Other surfaces with
serious whistle problems will be noted below.
In Figs. 10-13 and 10-14, no best-interpretation curve is shown for the heat
transfer test points at the low Reynolds number end of the test range. These
surfaces were tested by a transient technique, which is satisfactory in the
turbulent-flow range but does not yield valid results in laminar flow. Thus the
best-interpretation curve is shown only in the region of fully established turbu￾lent flow.
In Fig. 10-17, it may be noted that severe whistle difficulty was encountered
for Reynolds numbers above 5,000, with both the heat transfer and friction
results affected.
Figure 10-22 shows test results for a core made up of cylindrical tubes of

188 Compact Heat Exchangers
square cross section. A hot-water-to-air test system was used, and wall tempera￾tures were measured directly so that no correction for water-side heat transfer
resistance was necessary. Two curves are shown for the heat transfer results, one
with constant wall temperature and the other with an approximately constant
heat rate along the tubes. In all other tests the surfaces were at constant wall
temperature.
Some of the pin-fin surfaces (Figs. 10-76 to 10-81) whistled at the high
Reynolds number end of the test range. Especially severe whistle trouble was
encountered with surface PF 9(F) (Fig. 10-80), where the whistle was of great
intensity at Reynolds numbers above 4,000. Surface PF (10F) (Fig. 10-81) gave
whistle trouble also at low Reynolds numbers.
The circular-fin-surface data in Figs. 10-83, 10-84, and 10-86 were obtained
from test cores constructed from bimetal tubes. The original test results showed
definite evidence of considerable contact heat transfer resistance between the
inner copper liner and the outer aluminum fin muff. The data in Fig. 10-85 were
obtained from a core with copper tubes and integral copper spiraled fins; thus no
contact resistance existed. On the basis of the test results in Figs. 10-84 and
10-85, the magnitude of the contact resistance could be estimated; this estima￾tion was used to correct the heat transfer curves in Figs. 10-83 and 10-84, so that
the data are then representative only of the outer finned-tube-surface perform￾ance. Since this estimation was only an approximation, the correction intro￾duced a considerable additional experimental uncertainty into the data. For this
reason, the StPr2
/
3 curves in Figs. 10-83 and 10-84 are shown as dashed rather
than full lines, and the ±5 percent experimental uncertainty quoted for the
other test data does not apply. The effect of the contact resistance on the data
from surface CF 11.46 (Fig. 10-86) was so great that no correction was at￾tempted; thus only the friction factors are shown for this surface.
The figures for the glass ceramic matrices, Figs. 10-103 and 10-104, show by
dashed lines some theoretical curves for fully developed flow (constant heat
rate) for these particular shapes of flow passage. The differences between these
lines and the experimental data are probably primarily due to slight variations in
the sizes of the very large number of parallel-flow passages. It is difficult to
quantify these differences, but it can be shown theoretically that small differ￾ences can have substantial effects of the type shown [3].
REFERENCES
1. Putnam, A. A.: Flow Induced Noise in Heat Exchangers, Trans. ASME, vol. 81, p. 417,
1959.
2. Grotz, B. J., and F. R. Arnold: Flow-induced Vibrations in Heat Exchangers, Tech. Rept.
31, prepared under contract Nom 225(23) (NR-065-104) for the Office of Naval
Research, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, August, 1956.
3. Shah, R. K., and A. L. London: Effects of Non-Uniform Passages on Compact Heat
Exchanger Performance, Trans. ASME, vol. 102, p. 653, 1980.

-00
Table 10-1 HeatTransfer andFriction Data for FlowInside Circular andFlattened Circular Tubes
ST-I FT-I FTD-I
Re StPr'/' I Re StPr'I
' I Re StPr'I
' f
15,000 0,00288 0,00668 15,000 15,000
12,000 0.00300 0.00697 12,000 12,000
10,000 0.00310 0.00725 10,000 0.00292 0.00687 10,000 0.00356 0.00660
8,000 0.00314 0.00760 8,000 0.00298 0.00718 8,000 0.00378 0.00701
6,000 0.00294 0.00770 6,000 0.00305 0.00770 6,000 0.00409 0.00764
5,000 0.00254 0.00725 5,000 0.00310 0.00820 5,000 0.00430 0.00807
4,000 0.00193 0.00635 4,000 0.00317 0.00895 4,000 0.00457 0.00878
3,000 0.00202 0.00672 3,000 0.00291 0.00939 3,000 0.00494 0.00982
2,500 0.00229 0.00750 2,500 0.00272 0.00939 2,500 0.00520 0.01070
2,000 0.00269 0.00902 2,000 0.00310 0.0107 2,000 0.00540 0.0116
1,500 0.00334 0.01170 1,500 0.00381 0.0135 1,500 0.00503 0.0119
1,200 0.00399 0.01425 1,200 0.00453 0.0163 1,200 0.00475 0.0125
1,000 0.00463 0.01680 1,000 0.00522 0.0191 1,000 0.00518 0.0136
800 0.00558 0.0206 800 0.00621 0.0232 800 0.00605 0.0158
600 0.00707 0.0266 600 0.00780 0.0296 600 0.00738 0.0191
500 500 0.00900 0.0346 500
400 400 400
300 300 300

- Table 10-2 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for FlowNormal to Banks of BareTubes
Re StPr';' f Re StPr';' f Re StPr';' f Re StPr,j, f
S 1.50 - 1.25(5) S 1.50-1.25 S 1.25-1.25 S 1.50-1.00
15,000 0.00632 0.0508 15,000 0.00690 0.0503 15,000 15,000
12,000 0.00698 0.0530 12,000 0.00753 0.0525 12,000 12,000
10,000 0.00755 0.0550 10,000 0.00808 0.0543 10,000 10,000
8,000 0.00832 0.0578 8,000 0.00883 0.0566 8,000 8,000
6,000 0.00941 0.0614 6,000 0.00987 0.0596 6,000 6,000
5,000 0.0102 0.0640 5,000 0.0106 0.0615 5,000 0.00778 0.0375 5,000
4,000 0.0112 0.0670 4,000 0.0116 0.0641 4,000 0.00850 0.0391 4,000 0.0111 0.0613
3,000 0.0127 0.0702 3,000 0.0129 0.0675 3,000 0.00950 0.0415 3,000 0.0124 0.0652
2,500 0.0137 0.0725 2,500 0.0138 0.0700 2,500 0.0102 0.0430 2,500 0.0134 0.0680
2,000 0.0149 0.0750 2,000 0.0151 0.0728 2,000 0.0111 0.0450 2,000 0.0147 0.0713
1,500 0.0166 0.0780 1,500 0.0169 0.0768 1,500 0.0124 0.0477 1,500 0.0164 0.0761
1,200 0.0178 0.0800 1,200 0.0184 0.0800 1,200 0.0136 0.0498 1,200 O.oI80 0.0799
1,000 0.0189 0.0812 1,000 0.0198 0.0828 1,000 0.0146 0.0518 1,000 0.0193 0.0833
800 0.0201 0.0827 800 0.0216 0.0860 800 0.0159 0.0540 800 0.0213 0.0874
600 600 0.0241 0.0907 600 0.0178 0.0572 600 0.0239 0.0932
500 500 0.0258 0.0940 500 0.0191 0.0593 500 0.0257 0.0972
400 400 400 0.0208 0.0620 400
300 300 300 0.0233 0.0658 300
S 1.50-1.50 S 2.00-1.00 S 2.50-0.75 I 1.50- 1.25(5)
15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000
12,000 12,000 12,000 12,000
10,000 0.00809 0.0593 10,000 10,000 10,000 0.00752 0.0505
8,000 0.00888 0.0619 8,000 0.0108 0.0982 8,000 0.01060 0.1000 8,000 0.00820 0.0525
6,000 0.00997 0.0653 6,000 0.0122 0.104 6,000 0.01175 0.1036 6,000 0.00900 0.0549
5,000 0.0107 0.0674 5,000 0.0132 0.108 5,000 0.0126 0.1065 5,000 0.00958 0.0558
4,000 0.0117 0.0701 4,000 0.0145 0.112 4,000 0.0136 0.1100 4,000 0.01020 0.0562

-
-
3,000 0.0132 0.0740 3,000 0.0164 0.118 3,000 0.0152 0.1145 3,000 0.01080 0.0554
2,500 0.0142 0.0755 2,500 0.0177 0.122 2,500 0.0162 0.1175 2,500 0.01095 0.0535
2,000 0.0155 0.0769 2,000 0.0194 0.128 2,000 0.0176 0.1180 2,000 0.01075 0.0497
1,500 0.0174 0.0790 1,500 0.0219 0.135 1,500 0.0195 0.1200 1,500 0.00960 0.0410
1,200 0.0190 0.0803 1,200 0.0241 0.141 1,200 0.0212 0.1213 1,200 0.00778 0.0331
1,000 0.0204 0.0818 1,000 0.0261 0.146 1,000 0.0227 0.1220 1,000 0.00750 0.0281
800 0.0224 0.0834 800 0.0286 0.152 800 0.0246 0.1230 800 0.00790 0.0265
600 600 0.0323 0.160 600 0.0273 0.1250 600
500 500 500 500
400 400 400 400
300 300 300 300
I 1.50-1.25 I 1.25-1.25 FT-2 FTD-2
15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000
12,000 12,000 12,000 12,000
10,000 0.00715 0.0483 10,000 10,000 10,000 0.00580 0.0248
8,000 0.00790 0.0501 8,000 0.00580 0.0364 8,000 8,000 0.00611 0.0248
6,000 0.00892 0.0511 6,000 0.00654 0.0373 6,000 6,000 0.00646 0.0248
5,000 0.00960 0.0515 5,000 0.00706 0.0380 5,000 5,000 0.00660 0.0248
4,000 0.01050 0.0519 4,000 0.00777 0.0387 4,000 0.00490 0.0190 4,000 0.00661 0.0248
3,000 0.0520 3,000 0.0397 3,000 0.00481 0.0184 3,000 0.00655 0.0248
2,500 0.0516 2,500 0.0401 2,500 0.00450 0.0175 2,500 0.00640 0.0248
2,000 0.0483 2,000 0.0410 2,000 0.00447 0.0177 2,000 0.00611 0.0249
1,500 0.0401 1,500 0.0420 1,500 0.00500 0.0195 1,500 0.00588 0.0259
1,200 0.0328 1,200 0.0429 1,200 0.00590 0.0221 1,200 0.00639 0.0274
1,000 0.0301 1,000 0.0436 1,000 0.00678 0.0245 1,000 0.00714 0.0297
800 800 0.0444 800 0.00809 0.0278 800 0.00836 0.0337
600 600 0.0456 600 0.0101 0.0329 600 0.01020 0.0395
500 500 0.0459 500 0.0117 0.0368 500 0.01160 0.0439
400 400 0.0450 400 400
300 300 0.0421 300 300

Re SIPr'/' f Re SIPr'/' f Re SIPr'/' f
2.0 3.01 3.97
60,000 0.00228 0.00549 45,000 0.00233 0.00602 35,000 0.00246 0.00595
50,000 0.00237 0.00562 40,000 0.00239 0.00608 30,000 0.00254 0.00605
40,000 0.00248 0.00579 30,000 0.00254 0.00630 25,000 0.00263 0.00620
30,000 0.00264 0.00601 25,000 0.00264 0.00645 20,000 0.00276 0.00638
95,000 0.00274 0.00616 20,000 0.00277 0.00667 15,000 0.00291 0.00667
20,000 0.00288 0.00638 15,000 0.00295 0.00700 12,000 0.00302 0.00695
15,000 0.00305 0.00672 12,000 0.00310 0.00732 10,000 0.00316 0.00720
12,000 0.00320 0.00703 10,000 0.00322 0.00762 8,000 0.00330 0.00761
10,000 0.00333 0.00734 8,000 0.00336 0.00808 6,000 0.00348 0.00826
8,000 0.00347 0.00778 6,000 0.00355 0.00886 5,000 0.00357 0.00880
6,000 0.00363 0.00847 5,000 0.00366 0.00950 4,000 0.00367 0.00963
5,000 0.00373 0.00904 4,000 0.00373 0.01045 3,000 0.00367 0.01110
4,000 0.00379 0.01023 3,000 0.00368 0.01190 2,500 0.00357 0.01230
Table 10-3 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for Plain Plate-Fin Surfaces
to
4.0
SIPr'/'
Re f
0:) @
15,000
12,000 0.00287 0.00314 0.00631
10,000 0.00298 0.00326 0.00658
8,000 0.00312 0.00339 0.00689
6,000 0.00313 0.00334 0.00700
5,000 0.00321 0.00670
4,000 0.00290 0.00594
3,000 0.00244 0.00563
2,500 0.00238 0.00633

--e
2,000 0.00237 0.00255 0.00772
1,500 0.00296 0.00325 0.01010
1,200 0.00353 0.00394 0.01244
1,000 0.00407 0.00461 0.0148
800 0.00488 0.00562 0.0183
600 0.00614 0.00727 0.0241
500 0.00712 0.00858 0.0288
400
300
Re SIPr'!' j Re SIPr'!' j Re SIPr'!' j
5.3 6.2 9.03
15,000 15,000 15,000 0.00255 0.00708
12,000 12,000 0.00303 0.00708 12,000 0.00265 0.00740
10,000 0.00373 0.00764 10,000 0.00310 0.00735 10,000 0.00273 0.00763
8,000 0.00397 0.00806 8,000 0.00317 0.00768 8,000 0.00283 0.00799
6,000 0.00427 0.00870 6,000 0.00325 0.00807 6,000 0.00296 0.00842
5,000 0.00448 0.00913 5,000 0.00330 0.00838 5,000 0.00304 0.00870
4,000 0.00477 0.00978 4,000 0.00333 0.00875 4,000 0.00310 0.00903
3,000 0.00515 0.0108 3,000 0.00326 0.00923 3,000 0.00310 0.00980
2,500 0.00535 0.0115 2,500 0.00301 0.00958 2,500 0.00318 0.0106
2,000 0.00554 0.0127 2,000 0.00312 0.0103 2,000 0.00347 0.0122
1,500 0.00571 0.0146 1,500 0.00371 0.0127 1,500 0.00421 0.0152
1,200 0.00606 0.0167 1,200 0.00435 0.0152 1,200 0.00499 0.0182
1,000 0.00654 0.0189 1,000 0.00496 0.0176 1,000 0.00575 0.0214
800 0.00728 0.0228 800 0.00581 0.0211 800 0.00692 0.0262
600 0.00851 0.0299 600 600
(continued)

-(.0
,j:I. Table 10-3 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for Plain Plate-Fin Surfaces (continued)
Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'!> f
I I.I I I.II(a) 14.77
10,000 0.00314 0.00878 10,000 0.00288 0.00768 10,000 0.00310 0.00920
8,000 0.00333 0.00923 8,000 0.00303 0.00807 8,000 0.00326 0.00955
6,000 0.00356 0.00971 6,000 0.00324 0.00862 6,000 0.00352 0.0101
5,000 0.00372 0.00991 5,000 0.00338 0.00900 5,000 0.00367 0.0106
4,000 0.00390 0.0103 4,000 0.00353 0.00958 4,000 0.00389 0.0112
3,000 0.00412 0.0112 3,000 0.00368 0.0105 3,000 0.00417 0.0123
2,500 0.00424 0.0119 2,500 0.00373 0.0112 2,500 0.00435 0.0133
2,000 0.00436 0.0129 2,000 0.00375 0.0119 2,000 0.00456 0.0147
1,500 0.00444 0.0149 1,500 0.00420 0.0137 1,500 0.00495 0.0173
1,200 0.00471 0.0169 1,200 0.00505 0.0166 1,200 0.00538 0.0202
1,000 0.00515 0.0190 1,000 0.00586 0.0198 1,000 0.00585 0.0231
800 0.00599 0.0228 800 0.00704 0.0243 800 0.00663 0.0274
600 0.00733 0.0294 600 0.00890 0.0319 600 0.00791 0.0346
500 0.00840 0.0350 500 0.0103 0.0380 500 0.00898 0.0403
400 400 400
300 300 300
15.08 19.86 10.27T
15,000 15,000 10,000 0.00295 0.00723
12,000 12,000 9,000 0.00299 0.00740
10,000 10,000 8,000 0.00303 0.00763
8,000 8,000 0.00320 0.00851 7,000 0.00310 0.00790
6,000 0.00308 0.00882 6,000 0.00337 0.00900 6,000 0.00318 0.00826
5,000 0.00310 0.00900 5,000 0.00348 0.00931 5,000 0.00328 0.00871
4,000 0.00309 0.00925 4,000 0.00363 0.00972 4,000 0.00341 0.00945
3,000 0.00309 0.00970 3,000 0.00382 0.0104 3,000 0.00372 0.01085
2,500 0.00322 I
0.01040 2,500 0.00395 0.0112 2,000 I
0.00445 0.01370

2,000 I
0.00352 I
0.01205 2,000 I
0.00410 0.0123 1,500 I
0.00523 0.01645
1,500 0.00420 0.0151 1,500 0.00443 0.0142 1,200 0.00608 0.0195
1,200 0.00491 0.0182 1,200 0.00497 0.0167 1,000 0.00682 0.0228
1,000 0.00562 0.0215 1,000 0.00567 0.0197 800 0.00797 0.0278
800 0.00662 0.0264 800 0.00672 0.0242 600 0.00889 0.0357
600 0.00815 0.0343 600 0.00834 0.0314 500 0.01101 0.0419
500 0.00930 0.0405 500 0.00960 0.0372 400 0.0129 0.0511
400 400 0.0113 0.0457 300 0.0662
300 300 200
11,94T 12.00T 16.96T
-'0
CJl
10,000 0.00294 0.00716 10,000 10,000
9,000 0.00302 0.00730 9,000 0.00820 9,000
8,000 0.00309 0.00755 8,000 0.00302 0.00851 8,000
7,000 0.00317 0.00782 7,000 0.00312 0.00881 7,000
6,000 0.00322 0.00819 6,000 0.00322 0.00928 6,000 0.00790
5,000 0.00323 0.00856 5,000 0.00333 0.00980 5,000 0.00281 0.00809
4,000 0.00330 0.00885 4,000 0.00344 0.01045 4,000 0.00281 0.00835
3,000 0.00317 0.00956 3,000 0.00350 0.01128 3,000 0.00263 0.00875
2,000 0.00329 0.01145 2,000 0.00346 0.01285 2,000 0.00268 0.00962
1,500 0.00379 0.01350 1,500 0.00388 0.01475 1,500 0.00294 0.01088
1,200 0.00437 0.0159 1,200 0.00441 0.0170 1,200 0.00338 0.0125
1,000 0.00498 0.0181 1,000 0.00493 0.0195 1,000 0.00379 0.0144
800 0.00589 0.0220 800 0.00555 0.0238 800 0.00448 0.0178
600 0.00729 0.0285 600 0.00713 0.0306 600 0.00561 0.0232
500 0.00833 0.0336 500 0.00815 0.0359 500 0.00658 0.0275
400 0.00980 0.0411 400 0.00955 0.0437 400 0.00796 0.0339
300 0.01215 0.0535 300 0.01185 0.0566 300 0.01020 0.0442
200 200 0.01600 0.0811 200 0.0650
(continued)

....
0)
Table 10-3 HeatTransfer and Friction Datafor Plain Plate-Fin Surfaces (continued)
Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f
25.79T 30.33T 46.45T
7,000 7,000 7,000
6,000 6,000 6,000
5,000 5,000 5,000
4,000 0.00785 4,000 0.00891 4,000
3,000 0.00277 0.00831 3,000 0.00293 0.00981 3,000 0.0109
2,000 0.00312 0.00981 2,000 0.00356 0.01185 2,000 0.00294 0.0118
1,500 0.00354 0.01165 1,500 0.00418 0.01395 1,500 0.00349 0.0135
1,200 0.00401 0.0134 1,200 0.00481 0.0162 1,200 0.00418 0.0157
1,000 0.00450 0.0153 1,000 0.00545 0.0189 1,000 0.00482 0.0183
800 0.00529 0.0185 800 0.00643 0.0230 800 0.00581 0.0228
600 0.00670 0.0240 600 0.00802 0.0302 600 0.00735 0.0301
500 0.00782 0.0286 500 0.00922 0.0361 500 0.00856 0.0359
400 0.00942 0.0351 400 0.0110 0.0448 400 0.0446
300 0.01193 0.0460 300 0.0138 0.0595 300 0.0592
200 0.0673 200 0.0888 200 0.0875

-'"
.....
Table 10-4 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for Louvered Plate-Fin Surfaces
Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr2/ ' f
i-6.06 i(a)-6.06 i-6.06 i(a)-6.06 i-8.7
10,000 0.00551 0.0331 10,000 0.00638 0.0494 10,000 0.00568 0.0300 10,000 0.00598 0.0400 10,000 0.00542 0.0297
8,000 0.00593 0.0340 8,000 0.00688 0.0510 8,000 0.00605 0.0310 8,000 0.00645 0.0413 8,000 0.00583 0.0306
6,000 0.00651 0.0354 6,000 0.00760 0.0531 6,000 0.00655 0.0322 6,000 0.00714 0.0432 6,000 0.00640 0.0319
5,000 0.00690 0.0363 5,000 0.00810 0.0547 5,000 0.00690 0.0332 5,000 0.00760 0.0447 5,000 0.00678 0.0328
4,000 0.00738 0.0375 4,000 0.00878 0.0568 4,000 0.00734 0.0347 4,000 0.00809 0.0463 4,000 0.00737 0.0340
3,000 0.00805 0.0394 3,000 0.00970 0.0596 3,000 0.00791 0.0366 3,000 0.00895 0.0491 3,000 0.00794 0.0359
2,500 0.00849 0.0406 2,500 0.0102 0.0620 2,500 0.00829 0.0381 2,500 0.00941 0.05Il 2,500 0.00835 0.0374
2,000 0.00900 0.0426 2,000 0.0110 0.0646 2,000 0.00875 0.0402 2,000 0.0100 0.0540 2,000 0.00885 0.0394
1,500 0.00970 0.0461 1,500 0.OIl9 0.0696 1,500 0.00948 0.0438 1,500 0.0108 0.0588 1,500 0.00951 0.0430
1,200 0.0104 0.0496 1,200 0.0127 0.0745 1,200 0.0102 0.0474 1,200 0.OIl3 0.0634 1,200 0.0103 0.0472
1,000 0.0112 0.0532 1,000 0.0132 0.0795 1,000 0.0109 0.0512 1,000 0.0118 0.0680 1,000 0.0112 0.0515
800 0.0124 0.0587 800 0.0140 0.0860 800 0.OIl8 0.0571 800 0.0122 0.0752 800 0.0126 0.0585
600 0.0144 0.0682 600 0.0149 0.0962 600 0.0133 0.0667 600 0.0128 0.0880 600 0.0149 0.0700
500 0.0160 0.0755 500 500 500 500 0.0169 0.0793
400 400 400 400 400
300 300 300 300 300
i(a)-8.7 -r\-Il.l t-Il.l t(b)-Il.l i-Il.l
10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 0.00548 0.0242
8,000 0.00630 0.0372 8,000 8,000 0.00666 0.0309 8,000 0.00701 0.0349 8,000 0.00588 0.0253
6,000 0.00690 0.0395 6,000 0.00690 0.0350 6,000 0.00728 0.0333 6,000 0.00761 0.0364 6,000 0.00645 0.0271
5,000 0.00730 0.0410 5,000 0.00740 0.0367 5,000 0.00771 0.0351 5,000 0.00800 0.0375 5,000 0.00684 0.0283
4,000 0.00790 0.0428 4,000 0.00802 0.0390 4,000 0.00825 0.0374 4,000 0.00853 0.0390 4,000 0.00735 0.0300
3,000 0.00870 0.0450 3,000 0.00899 0.0426 3,000 0.00901 0.0408 3,000 0.00922 0.0412 3,000 0.00811 0.0326
2,500 0.00920 0.0470 2,500 0.00960 0.0452 2,500 0.00954 0.0431 2,500 0.00972 0.0430 2,500 0.00861 0.0346
2,000 0.00980 0.0497 2,000 0.0103 0.0491 2,000 0.0102 0.0464 2,000 0.0103 0.0456 2,000 0.00930 0.0375
1,500 0.0106 0.0550 1,500 0.0113 0.0553 1,500 0.OIl2 0.0512 1,500 0.OIl2 0.0502 1,500 0.0102 0.0423
1,200 0.0113 0.0580 1,200 0.0122 0.0610 1,200 0.0119 0.0558 1,200 0.0120 0.0550 1,200 0.0111 0.0469
1,000 0.0121 0.0620 1,000 0.0130 0.0662 1,000 0.0125 0.0600 1,000 0.0128 0.0595 1,000 0.0121 0.0513
800 0.0131 0.0680 800 0.0142 0.0738 800 0.0137 0.0670 800 0.0139 0.0662 800 0.0135 0.0582
600 0.0145 0.0790 600 0.0161 0.0848 600 0.0155 0.0772 600 0.0157 0.0780 600 0.0156 0.0700
500 0.0154 0.0890 500 0.0177 0.0925 500 0.0168 0.0850 500 0.0170 0.0870 500 0.0170 0.0796
400 400 400 400 400
300 300 300 300 300
(continued)

....
<:0
00
Table 10-4 HeatTransfer and Friction Datafor Louvered Plate-Fin Surfaces (continued)
Re 5tPr'/' f Re 5tPr'/' f Re 5tPr'/' f Re 5tPr'/' f
j(b)-I1.1 1- 11.1 t-I1.1 t(b)-I1.1
10.000 10,000 10,000 0.00432 0.0151 10,000 0.00440 0.0156
8,000 0.00590 0.0257 8.000 0.00557 0.0220 8,000 0.00462 0.0158 8,000 0.00469 0.0163
6,000 0.00650 0.0271 6.000 0.00604 0.0233 6,000 0.00508 0.0170 6.000 0.00510 0.0175
5,000 0.00694 0.0281 5,000 0.00640 0.0242 5,000 0.00537 0.0178 5.000 0.00537 0.0183
4.000 0.00752 0.0296 4,000 0.00680 0.0255 4,000 0.00576 0.0190 4.000 0.00572 0.0194
3.000 0.00835 0.0319 3.000 0.00739 0.0271 3,000 0.00630 0.0208 3,000 0.00621 0.0213
2.500 0.00889 0.0336 2.500 0.00777 0.0283 2.500 0.00663 0.0222 2,500 0.00655 0.0227
2.000 0.00960 0.0363 2.000 0.00825 0.0299 2.000 0.00711 0.0244 2,000 0.00699 0.0248
1,500 0.0105 0.0406 1.500 0.00888 0.0332 1.500 0.00787 0.0289 1.500 0.00762 0.0288
1.200 0.0112 0.0442 1.200 0.00950 0.0368 1,200 0.00859 0.0330 1.200 0.00831 0.0323
1.000 0.0119 0.0483 1,000 0.0104 0.0410 1.000 0.00928 0.0370 1.000 0.00894 0.0362
800 0.0130 0.0550 800 0.0117 0.0474 800 0.0103 0.0427 800 0.00981 0.0416
600 0.0148 0.0659 600 0.0137 0.0570 600 0.0119 0.0516 600 0.0112 0.0500
500 0.0161 0.0741 500 0.0150 0.0641 500 0.0132 0.0580 500 0.0122 0.0565
400 400 400 400
300 300 300 300

....
-0
-0
Table 10-5 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for Strip-Fin Plate-Fin Surfaces
Re StPr2l' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f
t(s)- I I.1 i- 15.2 i- 13.95
10,000 10,000
8,000 0.00525 0.0197 8,000 8,000 0.0628
6,000 0.00580 0.0209 6,000 0.00850 0.0487 6,000 0.01 I 10 0.0650
5,000 0.00620 0.0218 5,000 0.00896 0.0498 5,000 0.01170 0.0664
4,000 0.00669 0.0231 4,000 0.00959 0.0516 4,000 0.01250 0.0684
3,000 0.00740 0.0253 3,000 0.01040 0.0540 3,000 0.0137 0.0712
2,500 0.00789 0.0272 2,500 0.011 10 0.0558 2,500 0.0144 0.0733
2,000 0.00850 0.0298 2,000 0.011 77 0.0584 2,000 0.0155 0.0765
1,500 0.00940 0.0348 1,500 0.01267 0.0628 1,500 0.0168 0.0817
1,200 0.0102 0.0394 1,200 0.01327 0.0676 1,200 0.0181 0.0870
1,000 0.0109 0.0438 1,000 0.01373 0.0726 1,000 0.0192 0.0927
800 0.0122 0.0500 800 0.01427 0.0800 800 0.0204 0.1020
600 0.0139 0.0595 600 0.01520 0.0913 600 0.0223 0.11 70
500 0.0155 0.0665 500 0.01580 0.1010 500 0.0233 0.131
400 400 0.01675 0.1145 400 0.0247 0.154
300 300 0.01810 0.1390
t- 15.61 i- 19.86 t-22.68
7,000 - 0.0330
6,000 0.00758 0.0336
5,000 0.00802 0.0343 5,000 - 0.0275 5,000 - 0.0298
4,000 0.00865 0.0355 4,000 0.00770 0.0284 4,000 0.00721 0.0310
3,000 0.00952 0.0376 3,000 0.00850 0.0306 3,000 0.00810 0.0332
2,000 0.0111 0.0420 2,000 0.00988 0.0350 2,000 0.00960 0.0382
1,500 0.0125 0.0467 1,500 0.0110 0.0396 1,500 0.0108 0.0430
1,200 0.0138 0.0519 1,200 0.0119 0.0440 1,200 0.0119 0.0476
1,000 0.0150 0.0569 1,000 0.0128 0.0484 1,000 0.0130 0.0523
(continued)

Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f
t-15.61 t-19.86 t-22.68
800 0.0167 0.0645 800 0.0141 0.0550 800 0.0147 0.0600
600 0.0195 0.0772 600 0.0161 0.0660 600 0.0176 0.0736
500 0.0216 0.0880 500 0.0176 0.0750 500 0.0199 0.0845
400 0.0246 0.104 400 0.0198 0.0876 400 0.0234 0.0997
300 0.0295 0.131 300 0.0233 0.1090 300 0.0290 0.125
200 - 0.172
150 - 0.217
120 - 0.260
t-25.01 t-24.12 ..'6-27.03
5,000 - - 5,000 - -
4,000 - 0.0385 4,000 - 0.0388
3,000 0.00950 0.0398 3,000 - 0.0362 3,000 0.00960 0.0401
2,000 0.0107 0.0437 2,000 0.00965 0.0398 2,000 0.0113 0.0449
1,500 0.0121 0.0483 1,500 0.0103 0.0432 1,500 0.0129 0.0497
1,200 0.0133 0.0528 1,200 0.0110 0.0467 1,200 0.0143 0.0540
1,000 0.0145 0.0573 1,000 0.0117 0.0500 1,000 0.0156 0.0586
800 0.0162 0.0647 800 0.0125 0.0551 800 0.0176 0.0663
600 0.0187 0.0772 600 0.0138 0.0639 600 0.0210 0.0810
500 0.0207 0.0880 500 0.0152 0.0713 500 0.0238 0.0922
400 - 0.103 400 0.0170 0.0828 400 - 0.108
300 - 0.128 300 0.0202 0.102 300 - 0.135
200 - 0.175 200 - 0.137 200 - 0.185
150 - 0.219 150 - 0.171 150 - 0.231
120 - 0.261 120 - 0.276
..'6-19.35 ..'6-19.74 "'-12.22
5,000
I
-
I
- 5,000
I
-
I
- 10,000 I
0.00629 1
0.0394
4,000 - 0.0246 4,000 - - 8,000 0.00688 0.0413
1:'0 Table 10-5 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for Strip-Fin Plate-Fin Surfaces (continued)
o
o

o￾3,000 0.00830 0.0263 3,000 0.00764 0.0339 6,000 0.00770 0.0440
2,000 0.00940 0.0303 2,000 0.00843 0.0369 5,000 0.00828 0.0458 1,500 0.0105 0.0342 1,500 0.00910 0.0398
4,000 0.00903 0.0487
1,200 0.0115 0.0381 1,200 0.00974 0.0430 3,000 0.0101 0.0530
1,000 0.0125 0.0418 1,000 0.0104 0.0461 2,500 0.0108 0.0560
800 0.0138 0.0471 800 0.0114 0.0510 2,000 0.Oll9 0.0607
600 0.0158 0.0561 600 0.0129 0.0599 1,500 0.0133 0.0680
500 0.0174 0.0635 500 0.0141 0.0672 1,200 0.0146 0.0752
400 0.0195 0.0750 400 0.0158 0.0783 1,000 0.0156 0.0826
300
- 0.0937 300 0.0185 0.0962 800 0.0171 0.0942
200
- 0.130 200
- 0.131 600 0.0192 0.113
500 0.0205 0.130
400
300
t-l1.94(D) t-15.4(D) t-12.18(D)
9,000 0.0122 9,000 0.00512 0.0183
8,000 0.0123 8,000 0.00530 0.0184
7,000 0.00452 0.0126 7,000 0.00557 0.0189
6,000 0.00471 0.0131 6,000 0.00510 0.0167 6,000 0.00591 0.0196
5,000 0.00492 0.0137 5,000 0.00537 0.0175 5,000 0.00635 0.0203
4,000 0.00522 0.0146 4,000 0.00570 0.0186 4,000 0.00692 0.0218
3,000 0.00575 0.0162 3,000 0.00617 0.0202 3,000 0.00782 0.0241
2,500 0.00650 0.0213 2,000
2,000 0.00682 0.0198 2,000 0.00692 0.0228 1,500 0.00933 0.0290
1,500 0.00744 0.0231 1,500 0.00756 0.0255 0.01065 0.0341
1,200 0.0388
1,200 0.00830 0.0265 1,200 0.00809 0.0283 1,000 0.0119 0.0438
1,000 0.00911 0.0306 1,000 0.00864 0.0314 800 0.0129 0.0490
800 0.01045 0.0347 800 0.00952 0.0362 600 0.0141 0.0592
600 0.01255 0.0429 600 0.Oll07 0.0443 500 0.0169 0.0695
500 0.01415 0.0493 500 0.01227 0.0507 400 0.0191 0.0808
400 0.0166 0.0592 400 0.01407 0.0601 300 0.0230 0.1025
300 0.0205 0.0758 300 0.0169 0.0757 200 0.0278 0.1480
(continued)

o
Table 10-5 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for Strip-Fin Plate-Fin Surfaces (continued)
Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f
t-15.75(0) t-16.00(0) t-16.12(0)
9,000
8,000
7,000 0.0199
6,000 0.00619 0.0203
5,000 0.00649 0.0211 5,000 0.00778 0.0295
4,000 0.00713 0.0227 4,000 0.00838 0.0307
3,000 0.00813 0.0248 3,000 0.00925 0.0328
2,000 0.00992 0.0294 2,000 0.01085 0.0373
1,500 0.01125 0.0339 1,500 0.01205 0.0418 1,500 0.00987 0.0400
1,200 0.0124 0.0386 1,200 0.0132 0.0460 1,200 0.01060 0.0429
1,000 0.0136 0.0440 1,000 0.0142 0.0502 1,000 0.01123 0.0464
800 0.0154 0.0499 800 0.0159 0.0568 800 0.01205 0.0517
600 0.0185 0.0608 600 0.0188 0.0675 600 0.01352 0.0607
500 0.0209 0.0690 500 0.0209 0.0765 500 0.0150 0.0679
400 0.0819 400 0.0892 400 0.0176 0.0781
300 0.1025 300 0.1115 300 0.0226 0.0937
200 0.1425 200

w
c
!-19.82(D) !-20.06(D) !-16.12(T)
9,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000 5,000 0.0358
4,000 0.0390 4,000 0.0289 4,000 0.00705 0.0370
3,000 0.00880 0.0420 3,000 0.00855 0.0309 3,000 0.00773 0.0386
2,000 0.01015 0.0450 2,000 0.00995 0.0349 2,500 0.00820 0.0397
1,500 0.01155 0.0492 1,500 0.01115 0.0387 2,000 0.00880 0.0416
1,200 0.0128 0.0535 1,200 0.0120 0.0422 1,500 0.00967 0.0440
1,000 0.0139 0.0577 1,000 0.0129 0.0459 1,200 0.01045 0.0464
800 0.0154 0.0640 800 0.0144 0.0520 1,000 0.01122 0.0496
600 0.0180 0.0747 600 0.0173 0.0621 800 0.01225 0.0552
500 0.0202 0.0832 500 0.0197 0.0699 600 0.01395 0.0644
400 0.0955 400 0.0810 500 0.0155 0.0721
300 0.1175 300 0.0995 400 0.0179 0.0830
200 0.1585 200 300 0.0219 0.1003

to
o
,jo..
Table 10-6 HeatTransfer and Friction DataforWavy-Fin Plate-Fin Surfaces
11.44-i w 11.5-iW 17.8-i W
Re StPr,j, f Re StPr,j, f Re StPr,j, f
10,000 0.00686 0.0331
8,000 0.00712 0.0359 8,000 0.00746 0.0357
6,000 0.00794 0.0401 6,000 0.00831 0.0398
5,000 0.00846 0.0430 5,000 0.00890 0.0427 5,000 0.00675 0.0293
4,000 0.00920 0.0469 4,000 0.00970 0.0467 4,000 0.00740 0.0320
3,000 0.01025 0.0524 3,000 0.01077 0.0525 3,000 0.00835 0.0358
2,500 0.0110 0.0563 2,500 0.01155 0.0567 2,500 0.00900 0.0385
2,000 0.0119 0.0615 2,000 0.0126 0.0625 2,000 0.00982 0.0421
1,500 0.0132 0.0691 1,500 0.0140 0.0704 1,500 0.0110 0.0478
1,200 0.0144 0.0758 1,200 0.0150 0.0779 1,200 0.0120 0.0530
1,000 0.0153 0.0819 1,000 0.0158 0.0845 1,000 0.0129 0.0579
800 0.0165 0.0888 800 0.0167 0.0926 800 0.0142 0.0643
600 0.0175 0.0984 600 0.0178 0.1035 600 0.0158 0.0738
500 0.0179 0.1045 500 0.0185 0.111 500
400 400 0.0194 0.118 400
300 300

to
o
(Jl
Table 10-7 HeatTransfer andFriction Data for Pin-Fin Plate-Fin Surfaces
Re SIPr'/' f Re SIPr'/' f Re SIPr'/' f
AP-I AP-2 PF-3
8,000 0.00808 0.0815
6,000 0.00905 0.0793
5,000 0.00970 0.0780
4,000 0.0105 0.0762 4,000 0.0130 0.166
3,000 0.0116 0.0741 3,000 0.0145 0.165 2,000 0.00645
2,500 0.0123 0.0725 2,500 0.0155 0.164 1,500 0.00720
2,000 0.0134 0.0707 2,000 0.0168 0.158 1,200 0.00784 0.0373
1,500 0.0152 0.0708 1,500 0.0183 0.151 1,000 0.00840 0.0383
1,200 0.0161 0.0718 1,200 0.0190 0.150 800 0.00912 0.0399
1,000 0.0175 0.0755 1,000 0.0200 0.151 600 0.01020 0.0430
800 0.0183 0.0800 800 0.0209 0.156 500 0.01085 0.0454
600 600 0.0218 0.170 400 0.0118 0.0491
500 500 0.0222 0.180 300 0.0132 0.0551
400 400 250 0.0600
300 300 200 0.0673
PF-4(F) PF-9(F) PF-IO(F)
25,000 0.00740 15,000 0.00757 0.0488
20,000 0.00800 12,000 0.00826 0.0493
17,000 0.00842 10,000 0.00890 0.0503
8,000 0.0128 0.153 15,000 0.00880 8,000 0.00973 0.0530
6,000 0.0144 0.153 12,000 0.00951 6,000 0.01085 0.0573
5,000 0.0156 0.153 10,000 0.0101 5,000 0.01172 0.0589
4,000 0.0171 0.153 8,000 0.0108 4,000 0.0128 0.0603
3,000 0.0192 0.156 6,000 0.0120 3,000 0.0142 0.0626
2,500 0.0207 0.160 5,000 0.0128 2,500 0.0157 0.0640
2,000 0.0227 0.167 4,000 0.0137 0.0692 2,000 0.0170 0.0640
(continued)

I'Q
C
en
Table 10-7 HeatTransfer and Friction Data for Pin-Fin Plate-Fin Surfaces (continued)
Re StPr'l' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f
PF-4(F) PF-9(F) PF-IO(F)
1,500 0.0255 0.175 3,000 0.0152 0.0718 1,500 0.0170 0.0605
1,200 0.0279 0.182 2,500 0.0161 0.0737 1,200 0.0174 0.0561
1,000 0.0301 0.189 2,000 0.0173 0.0760 1,000 0.0182 0.0577
800 0.0330 0.198 1,500 0.0191 0.0800 800 0.0198 0.0670
600 1,200
500 1,000
400 900
300 800

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 207
Table 10-8 Perforated-Fin Plate-Fin Surfaces
Re StPr'/' f
13.95(P)
12,000 0.01168
10,000 0.00503 0.01220
8,000 0.00547 0.01285
6,000 0.00600 0.01386
5,000 0.00631 0.0146
4,000 0.00660 0.0155
3,000 0.00695 0.0169
2,500 0.00708 0.0178
2,000 0.00700 0.0187
1,500 0.00736 0.0207
1,200 0.00817 0.0232
1,000 0.00893 0.0257
800 0.01010 0.0295
600 0.01180 0.0357
500 0.0132 0.0407

Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f Re StPr'/' f
CF-7.34 CF-8.72 CF-8.72C
10,000 0.00388 0.0304 10,000 0.0306 10,000
8,000 0.00465 0.0313 8,000 0.0314 8,000 0.00638 0.0347
6,000 0.00500 0.0326 6,000 0.00645 0.0326 6,000 0.00685 0.0359
5,000 0.00547 0.0334 5,000 0.00685 0.0333 5,000 0.00727 0.0368
4,000 0.00609 0.0348 4,000 0.00740 0.0344 4,000 0.00785 0.0381
3,000 0.00701 0.0365 3,000 0.00820 0.0360 3,000 0.00879 0.0401
2,500 0.00770 0.0379 2,500 0.00880 0.0371 2,500 0.00945 0.0418
2,000 0.00860 0.0395 2,000 0.00960 0.0388 2,000 0.01035 0.0440
1,500 0.00990 0.0420 1,500 0.0108 0.0412 1,500 0.01170 0.0470
1,200 0.01105 0.0441 1,200 0.0119 0.0433 1,200 0.01285 0.0495
1,000 0.01210 0.0461 1,000 0.0129 0.0453 1,000 0.01390 0.0520
800 0.01350 0.0490 800 0.0143 0.0483 800 0.01504 0.0551
600 0.01506 0.0530 600 0.0165 0.0532 600 0.01760 0.0597
500 500 0.0180 0.0572 500 0.01915 0.0630
400 400 400
300 300 300
CF·II.46 9.68-.87 9.1-.737-S
10,000 0.0255 10,000 0.00326 0.0106 10,000 0.00389 0.0133
8,000 0.0260 8,000 0.00339 0.0108 8,000 0.00417 0.0142
6,000 0.0267 6,000 0.00359 0.0113 6,000 0.00460 0.0156
5,000 0.0272 5,000 0.00369 0.0116 5,000 0.00493 0.0167
4,000 0.0278 4,000 0.00385 0.0122 4,000 0.00539 0.0183
3,000 0.0290 3,000 0.00405 0.0133 3,000 0.00608 0.0206
2,500 0.0300 2,500 0.00411 0.0142 2,500 0.00656 0.0223
2,000 0.0314 2,000 0.00427 0.0155 2,000 0.00726 0.0247
1,500 0.0337 1,500 0.00477 0.0174 1,500 0.00831 0.0284
1,200 0.0358 1,200 0.00536 0.0196 1,200 0.00934 0.0320
Table 10-9 HeatTransfer and Friction Datafor Flow Normal to Banks of Finned Tubes
00

to
o
1,000 0.0379 1,000 0.00600 0.0219 1,000 0.01030 0.0354
800 0.0408 800 0.00701 0.0256 800 0.01175 0.0402
600 0.0450 600 0.00861 0.0321 600 0.01377 0.0476
500 0.0481 500 0.00982 0.0376 500 0.01526 0.0531
400 0.0522 400 0.01150 0.0463 400
300 300 300
9.68-.87-R 9.29-.737-SR I I.32-.737-SR
10,000 0.00390 0.0183 10,000 0.00514 0.0206 10,000 0.00453 0.0180
8,000 0.00412 0.0191 8,000 0.00546 0.0219 8,000 0.00468 0.0192
6,000 0.00445 0.0201 6,000 0.00590 0.0236 6,000 0.00533 0.0207
5,000 0.00468 0.0208 5,000 0.00620 0.0247 5,000 0.00563 0.0218
4,000 0.00498 0.0217 4,000 0.00660 0.0261 4,000 0.00602 0.0232
3,000 0.00543 0.0228 3,000 0.00712 0.0280 3,000 0.00655 0.0253
2,500 0.00573 0.0238 2,500 0.00751 0.0294 2,500 0.00690 0.0269
2,000 0.00615 0.0255 2,000 0.00802 0.0315 2,000 0.00739 0.0290
1,500 0.00676 0.0284 1,500 0.00885 0.0346 1,500 0.00816 0.0323
1,200 0.00727 0.0309 1,200 0.00964 0.0380 1,200 0.00892 0.0353
1,000 0.00772 0.0333 1,000 0.01045 0.0416 1,000 0.00968 0.0384
800 0.00832 0.0366 800 0.01176 0.0472 800 0.0108 0.0429
600 0.00920 0.0422 600 0.01390 0.0569 600 0.0127 0.0505
500 0.01000 0.0470 500 500 0.0142 0.0565
400 0.01128 0.0550 400 400 0.0163 0.0652
300 300 300

II 31 51 61 71
120,000 0.00784 0.255 80,000 0.00804 0.223 60,000 0.00820 0.213 40,000 0.00865 0.185 30,000 0.00860 0.153
100,000 0.00815 0.227 60,000 0.00872 0.230 40,000 0.00940 0.226 30,000 0.00930 0.190 20,000 0.00995 0.163
80,000 0.00858 0.228 40,000 0.00990 0.239 30,000 0.0103 0.235 20,000 0.0107 0.202 15,000 0.0111 0.171
60,000 0.00922 0.230 30,000 0.01l0 0.243 20,000 0.0119 0.248 15,000 0.0120 0.213 10,000 0.0129 0.183
40,000 0.0105 0.232 20,000 0.0126 0.252 15,000 0.0132 0.257 10,000 0.0140 0.228 8,000 0.0140 0.190
30,000 0.01l5 0.234 15,000 0.0142 0.257 10,000 0.0154 0.267 8,000 0.0155 0.234 6,000 0.0156 0.200
20,000 0.0133 0.236 10,000 0.0166 0.264 8,000 0.0167 0.273 6,000 0.0174 0.241 4,000 0.0183 0.212
15,000 0.0147 0.240 8,000 0.0182 0.268 6,000 0.0188 0.280 4,000 0.0206 0.251 3,000 0.0204 0.222
10,000 0.0170 0.247 6,000 0.0203 0.273 4,000 0.0221 0.290 3,000 0.0233 0.259 2,000 0.0239 0.233
8,000 0.0185 0.250 4,000 0.0236 0.278 3,000 0.0247 0.298 2,000 0.0276 0.267 1,500 0.0270 0.242
6,000 0.0206 0.256 3,000 0.0264 0.283 2,000 0.0294 0.310 1,500 0.0311 0.274 1,000 0.0324 0.252
4,000 0.0242 0.267 2,000 0.0304 0.295 1,500 0.0332 0.321 1,000 0.0370 0.291
3,000 0.0268 1,500 0.0337 0.308 1,000 0.0397 0.347
2,000 0.0306 1,000 0.0388 0.300 800 0.0436 0.361
1,500 0.0337 600 0.0492 0.386
o
Table 10-10 HeatTransfer and Friction Data forCrossed-Rod Matrices
Re
In-line stacking
Staggered stacking
f
IS 3S 5S 6S 7S
120,000 0.00840 0.356 80,000 0.00798 0.253 60,000 0.00704 0.173 40,000 0.00745 0.142 30,000 0.00806 0.132
100,000 0.00880 0.370 60,000 0.00888 0.267 40,000 0.00832 0.189 30,000 0.00825 0.150 20,000 0.00932 0.142
80,000 0.00942 0.383 40,000 0.0101 0.292 30,000 0.00935 0.200 20,000 0.00973 0.164 15,000 0.0104 0.151
60,000 0.0103 0.401 30,000 0.011l 0.308 20,000 0.01l0 0.217 15,000 0.01l0 0.175 10,000 0.0121 0.165
40,000 0.01l9 0.429 20,000 0.0130 0.330 15,000 0.0124 0.230 10,000 0.0130 0.019 8,000 0.0132 0.174
30,000 0.0133 0.443 15,000 0.0145 0.342 10,000 0.0148 0.249 8,000 0.0142 0.198 6,000 0.0147 0.185
20,000 0.0155 0.463 10,000 0.0173 0.361 8,000 0.0162 0.258 6,000 0.0160 0.209 4,000 0.0172 0.200
15,000 0.0175 0.478 8,000 0.0190 0.371 6,000 0.0185 0.271 4,000 0.0189 0.223 3,000 0.0192 0.210
10,000 0.0208 0.498 6,000 0.0215 0.383 4,000 0.0222 0.290 3,000 0.0212 0.235 2,000 0.0225 0.222
8,000 0.0227 0.510 4,000 0.0256 0.401 3,000 0.0255 0.307 2,000 0.0250 0.251 1,500 0.0254 0.231
6,000 0.0253 0.530 3,000 0.0293 0.419 2,000 0.0310 0.331 1,500 0.0286 0.263 1,000 0.0305 0.243
4,000 0.0292 0.561 2,000 0.0351 0.452 1,500 0.0356 0.351 1,000 0.0351 0.280
3,000 0.0328 1,500 0.0401 0.480 1,000 0.0431 0.383
2,000 0.0390 1,000 0.0488 0.527 800 0.0480 0.401
1,500 0.0451 600 0.0550 0.430

t.:l
--
Random stacking
lR 2R 3R 4R 5R
100,000 0.0086 0.280 80,000 0.0089 0.277 80,000 0.0081 0.232 80,000 0.0074 0.215 80,000 0.0070
80,000 0.0093 0.290 60,000 0.0098 0.290 60,000 0.0090 0.243 60,000 0.0083 0.230 60,000 0.0079 0.190
60,000 0.0103 0.301 40,000 0.0114 0.308 40,000 0.0105 0.267 40,000 0.0099 0.248 40,000 0.0093 0.207
40,000 0.0117 0.315 30,000 0.0126 0.313 30,000 0.0118 0.280 30,000 0.0110 0.260 30,000 0.0103 0.218
30,000 0.0130 0.323 20,000 0.0145 0.330 20,000 0.0137 0.297 20,000 0.0120 0.274 20,000 0.0120 0.230
20,000 0.0150 0.334 10,000 0.0190 0.346 10,000 0.0178 0.318 10,000 0.0165 0.296 10,000 0.0155 0.254
10,000 0.0196 0.350 8,000 0.0208 0.350 8,000 0.0194 0.320 8,000 0.0180 0.300 8,000 0.0170 0.262
8,000 0.0215 0.354 6,000 0.0232 0.356 6,000 0.0215 0.329 6,000 0.0200 0.307 6,000 0.0187 0.270
6,000 0.0241 0.360 4,000 0.0272 0.362 4,000 0.0251 0.339 4,000 0.0231 0.317 4,000 0.0220 0.283
4,000 0.0283 0.370 3,000 0.0308 0.371 3,000 0.0281 0.343 3,000 0.0258 0.322 3,000 0.0247 0.290
3,000 0.0319 0.379 2,000 0.0364 0.381 2,000 0.0330 0.355 2,000 0.0300 0.349 2,000 0.0289 0.299
2,000 0.0379 1,000 0.0500 1,000 0.0443 0.375 1,000 0.0400 1,000 0.0382 0.330
1,000 0.0520 800 0.0560 800 0.0490 0.381 800 0.0442 800 0.0420 0.350
800 0.0580 600 0.0640 600 0.0560 600 0.0509 600 0.0479 0.384
600 0.0670 400 0.0620 400 0.0580
300 0.0720 300 0.0670
6R 7R
60,000 0.154 30,000 0.00838 0.157
40,000 0.0086 0.169 20,000 0.00980 0.170
30,000 0.0094 0.180 15,000 0.0110 0.179
20,000 0.0108 0.195 10,000 0.0129 0.194
10,000 0.0138 0.218 8,000 0.0140 0.200
8,000 0.0150 0.227 6,000 0.0156 0.210
6,000 0.0167 0.237 4,000 0.0183 0.222
4,000 0.0195 0.250 3,000 0.0204 0.229
3,000 0.0219 0.257 2,000 0.0239 0.238
2,000 0.0255 0.263 1,500 0.0270 0.244
1,000 0.0340 0.286 1,000 0.0324 0.252
800 0.0375 0.303
600 0.0422 0.331
400 0.0510
300 0.0590
200 0.0730

212 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table 10-11 Plate-Fin Matrices
Re StPr'/' f
50lMOD
800 0.0116 0.0505
600 0.0130 0.0568
500 0.0142 0.0622
400 0.0161 0.0700
300 0.0197 0.0845
200 0.0272 0.I13
150 0.0347 0.142
100 0.0490 0.196
80 0.0595 0.237
60 0.077 0.301
50 0.091 0.352
Table 10-12 Glass Ceramic Matrices
Re StPr'/' f
505A
700 0.0044 0.0210
500 0.0063 0.0290
400 0.0078 0.0357
300 0.0104 0.047
200 0.0155 0.069
150 0.0207 0.091
100 0.0310 0.132
80 0.0385 0.163
519
800 0.00505 0.0229
600 0.00675 0.0298
500 0.00810 0.0353
400 0.0102 0.0438
300 0.0136 0.0577
200 0.0205 0.0856
150 0.0270 0.113
120 0.0340 0.142
100 0.0405 0.170
80 0.0510 0.212

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 213
Table 10-13 Heat Transfer and Friction Data for Sphere-Bed Matricest
Random packing, p = 0.37 to 0.39
Re
50,000
20,000
10,000
5,000
2,000
1,000
500
200
100
50
20
10
StPr,j
,
0.0089
0.0118
0.0144
0.0178
0.023
0.029
0.0355
0.046
0.056
0.069
0.091
0.112
f
0.30
0.34
0.37
0.41
0.47
0.52
0.59
0.80
1.10
1.65
0.30
5.2
t See Fig. 7-10 for graph of these data.
Fig. 10-1 Flow inside circular tubes, surface ST-1.
.030
KK '-~-A 18.3"--ej .020 0.211 11
•
lf4rh = 79.2
.015 -
'<K· .010 .....
r-,
-;: -..;;:
.007 ."'" ['\ v 1./ t--
005
r-, \
1'-... ~BEST INTERPRETATION ... <, /
Q.
...
en t-, .003 "
1/ . .
002 PRe XI03 "-
I
(4rhG/p) -
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 30 4.0 6.0 10.0 15.0
Tube inside diameter =0.231 in =5.876 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter =0.231 in, 0.01925 ft =5.876 x 1O-3m
Flow length/hydraulic diameter, Ll4'h = 79.2
Free-flow area per tube =0.0002900 ft2 =27.016 x 10-6m2

• 'O"i:-J..-l
r lor;--;
f-.,
6.0 I 8.0 110.0
" ""to--...
"---
\
2 BEf T INTERPRE.0T10
,
I I I
i I "'---<""I
-+---+--4---+
: !.I :
-H-t--'-------+
I I He x10'3
(4rhG/jI)
0.8 I 1.0 15 2.0 30 4.0
''-
020'+-+J-:l-lJJl---l -
I I ttJ.! I
010 I. .
008 -L-L.-li~
. .,---.1.....L\ ., -- i _I I I • __ <4: ' I I I I
.. , , .
.050 -+-+-m .14" ,,£03" DIMPLE DEPTH 114" <:;234"
I haa --+ -+ 5t± . <t:i5
. .J A
.., "a elL065" 030 +--+_+_+_+065"~~ I 3 60 --..; 302"
D~D c--.p--c
004 --t-t-
.003 I IJ_
HII' i I
0.4 0.5 0.6
,.040-+--
Fig. 10-3 Flow inside dimpled flattened tubes. surface FTO-1.
I-- eo
006 N... . c-
.005 cil
Ia040
~Xro' I"\: 10030 r-, . .065"-j1J.-- 3.60~T r.114'
b.Q20 _
i".t-.". 0.015
\
.
0.010 to. ...
...
0.008 t?
I"- i"'--o.
'" r-, \
p.OO6
r-, \ --
'"' )- BEST INTERPRETATION 0005
p.0Q4 Y
r-,
p.OO3
............... 1'<
pem5
Re 110-3 (4 rh G/)J)
0.50.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 40 5.0 F.n ao JC1()
I:'Q Fig. 10-2 Flow inside flattened circular tubes, surface FT-1.
....
,j>,.
Tube 10 before flattening = 0.234 in = 5.94 x la-3 m
Tube inside dimension perpendicular to flats = 0.114 in = 2.90 x 10-3 m
Tube inside dimension parallel to flats =0.302 in =7.67 x la-3 m
Length of flat along tube = 3.60 in = 91.44 x 1a- 3 m
Length of section from flat-to-circular-to-flat cross section
= 0.345 in = 8.77 x la-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01433 ft = 4.368 x 10-3 m
Minimum free-flow areaper tube = 0.0002195 ft2 = 20.392 x la-6 m
Tube 10 before flattening = 0,234 in = 5.94 x 1O-3m
Tube inside dimension perpendicular to flats = 0,114 in = 2,90 x 10. 3 m
Tube inside dimension parallel to flats = 0.302 in = 7.67 x 10- 3 m
Length of flat along tube =3.60 in =91.4 x 1O-3m
Length of section from flat-to-circular-to-flat cross section
= 0.345 in = 8.77 x la-3 m
Oimple depth =0,03 in =0.76 x 1O-3m
Minimum distance between dimples = 0.5 in = 12.5 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01116 ft =3.339 x la-3m
Minimum free-flow area per tube = 0,000169 ft2 = 15.501 x 10·6m2

"'"
....
Fig. 10-4 Flow normal to a staggered tube bank (steady-state tests). surface
S 1.50-1.25(a).
'090
·070 0-r::--
. • "1;-0 N.- ·060
- r..~ ·050
II ·040 -4; . ..I..
BEST INTERPRETATION Am' t
7L'OT. T
'030
~t ._1t'l'LS
15 TU8£ ROWS
020
r----.--,
015
[2 r-,
010 :t .
'008 ell
.Q06 I
.
I Re X 10' 14rhG/IJ)
0.6 08 1.0 1.5 2.0 30 4.0 60 8.0 10 15
Tube outside diameter = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.0166 ft = 5.029 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, 0 = 0.333
Heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 80.3 ft 2
/f t 3 = 263.451 m2/m3
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in spacestransverse to flow.
Fig. 10-5 Flow normal to a staggered tube bank (transient tests). surface S 1.50-1.25.
·090 'lit-
'070
~r-
.....
,.........I---. ·060 /
l"'- t--,... - t-::-- -050
040
BEST INTERPRETATION
·030 \
'r--.. If
~
F~W . . .
. "'-... ·020 W -
r--. -lXfl"'~ i
·015
-....,
""-...,
·010
f--- .......
o, r- 008 ell
..........
'006 1
'1 Re xIO-> (4rh
G!)J)
0.4 06 08 1.0 1.'5 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10 15
Tube outside diameter = 0.375 in = 9.525 x 1O-3m
Hydrau Iic diameter, 4rh
= 0.0249 ft = 7.569 X 10-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, 0 =0.333
Heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 53.6 ft2
/ft 3 = 175.197 m2/m3
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in spaces transverse to flow.

l-<
0)
Fig. 10-6 Flow normal to a staggered tube bank (transient tests), surface
S 1.25-1.25.
Fig. 10-7 Flow normal to a staggered tube bank (transient tests), surface
S 1.50-1.00.
rt-J..-I I 0 I\i----L
--?'Xt
"
30 40 5.0 60 80 100
n==r
I A 1
('
15 2.0
tt-V+l
INTERPRETATION -
I
t-, Re x 10-3
(4rhG/}J)
fJO I
I I I I
040506 08 10
1002
-a., --
0.060 -e-; b--.,
0.050 t--h;
-
r---. --0......, I-<>. 0.040 .......,r---
0030 ~8 . BEST 'W o-l; ~8
"'b':. -r- 'T¥'
0.020 F:~W ~_ r----I"--, 1/ • +¥-1. \j'Z5"
0.015 !2 <,/<...1 +< + 1:f' .
:t ~h: Q4688· X{IZ5 t
0010 u:; i"'-.....
.
0.008 I r--.....
I Re x10-3
(4rh
GI}J)
0.3 0.4 0.50.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.060
Tube outside diameter =0.375 in = 9.525 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0125 ft =3.810 x 10-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, 0 = 0.200
Heat transfer arealtotal volume, 0<= 64.4 ft2/ft3 = 211.286 m2/m 3
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in spaces transverse to flow.
Tube outside diameter = 0.375 in = 9.525 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.0196 ft = 6.071 x 1O-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, 0 = 0.333
Heat transfer area/total volume, 0<= 67.1 ft2/ft3 = 220.144 m2/m3
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in spacestransverse to flow.

Fig. 10-8 Flow normal to a staggered tube bank (transient tests). surface
S 1.50-1.50.
Fig. 10-9 Flow normal to a staggered tube bank (transient tests). surface
S 2.00-1.00.
i-L-L"'--J _
60 80 10.0
003 I
015
010
008 I I I I IA----+-_+__+_
Tube outside diameter = 0.375 in = 9.525 x 1O-3m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.0327 ft = 9.957 X 10-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.414
Heat transfer area/total volume, Ci = 50.3 ft2/ft3 = 165.026 m2/m3
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in diagonal spaces.
006 .
005 BEST INTERPRETATION
004 ! i---r I +-1AlR-:'
. ----t-- FLOW
t
£?
N I I I
002 0: _I I : ' :
. cil ~TI -+.---1-1~=oa.i!.J:-~
10l5~H￾10.010 __L11.~~G/)J)
05 06 08 1.0 1.5 20- --30
Tube outside diameter = 0.375 in = 9.525 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.0298 ft = 9.093 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area,0=0.333
Heat transfer area/total volume, a = 44.8 ft2/ft3 = 146.982 m2/m3
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in spaces transverseto flow.
0080 >... 0
0070 -
1
0060 / .....1--
( BEST INTERPRETATION
0050
+ t t
0.040
+
+ + +
0.030 A'. ot 0.5625" -
<-
FLOW . +
0.025 .
t--.. Lt ;. + + Xi{50
0.020 +
""-r-; r-, 0562~·~15~;·
0.015 '"
N r-,
0:
...
(/)
0~010 "" ..........
0008
Re x10-3 (4rhG/}'1
0.7 1.0 15 2.0 3.0 4~0 6.0 8010.0
Nl
......

218 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-10 Flow normal to a staggered tube bank (transient tests), surface
S 2.50-0.75.
i i
I I
0./50
I
I
-+
0./25
- I \ !A- i
0.100
0.080 \
-f------ ->~
k----
,.-~ I,.-~ I,.-~ ,.- 0.060 1\ ;
I
\
i\:
k~
I7T
0.050
BEST INTERPRETATION I -i\t1 '--If
0.040 /1---. :,.- I---. ,.- t
i
,\.10 r
FLOW
I
0.030 I -CD - Xt'25
., l>-., ,.-t;',.-I---. i / !\ 0.025 r--- /
\..).J I I... I
f2 .. i
0.020 ~-
.. T K
. 8
c... ..Vl i
0.015 I K
I
Re x 10'3 (4rhG1J) h,-
, ',' f-.... 0.010 0.50.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.06.0 8.010.0
Tube outside diameter =0.375 in =9.525 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.0271 ft = 8.255 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area,a = 0.366
Heat transfer area/total volume, (){ = 53.6 ft2/ft3 = 175.853 m2/m3
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in diagonal spaces.
Fig. 10-11 Flow normal to staggered tube banks. (Data of Grimison.)
~'E17-'
~'- -
0.30
l-$-=t~
0.20 - C
0
0.10 - l- a
0.080 TO SCALE FOR CASE 0
0.060 A_
t----
0.040 SPACING x, X,
I
A 1.25 2.00 0.030
ci e 1.50 2.00
'A 0 I I
0.020
A~ r-, C 2.00 1.50
D 2.00 2.00
<, r-,
!--..... z--,
0.010 "-
0.008 c... ..Vl <, <, 0.006
Re x 10-3 ....... 0.004
1.0 2.0 4.0 10.0 20.0 40.0 100.0

-
Fig. 10-12 Flow normal to an in-line tube bank (steady-state tests), surface
I 1.50-1.25(a).
.060
.050 --" o 0 0 o 0 ...
v:- 0
0 --
.040 .....
~
·'liT .030
-,
t' -'--
-,,---
0 ",01.50
""
,-
.020
FLOW .... ...-l￾0.375·
.015
BEST
jUl25· 'l~
I
.010 Ii: .- ..-....
---
... / 008 (Jl
0- ",....
<-- b-....
.006 -3 Re X10 (4rh
G/}J)
0.6 0.8 1.0 15 20 3.0 4.0 5060 8.0 100 15.0
Tube outside diameter = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.166 ft = 5.029 X 10-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, 0 = 0.338
Heat transfer area/total volume, a = 80.4 ft2
/ft 3 = 263.78 m2
/m 3
Fig. 10-13 Flow normal to an in-line tube bank (transient tests), surface
11.50-1.25.
.060
.050 i/ :--
.040 -
/ \
-E~(
""I'"Ix"""" 0.375"
.030 V'<V t.
I'"t'\ I" t-\I'"t-, X,:I.50
BEST INTERPRETATION "\
'~
1..1 \..V
.020 '\ + p(+
015 0 0 0
I't'\ I'"t'\ I' t-\I'"t'\
r": '::-l-I '-V' 0
1..1 '-V 0
" 0.469-1--- 1---1- x -1.25
co 0
N
.010 ...
0-
en r-
.008 r￾I
<,
.006 I Re x10.3
(4r
h
G/)l)
08 10 15 20 3.0 4.0 5.06.0 8.0 10.0 15.0
Tube outside diameter = 0.375 in = 9.525 x 1O-3m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0248 ft =7.569 x 10-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.333
Heat transfer area/total volume, a = 53.6 ft2
/ft 3 = 175.853 m2/m3

220 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-14 Flow normal to an in-linetube bank (transient tests). surface I 1.25 -1.25.
0.060
0.050
0.040 --- r
0.030 o.37!5"
BEST Xt,"1.25
AIR ;:K .. 0.020 Fi:Or ::::K ::::K
0
0
c 0 .
0
......
0.469"
0.015
0.469" XI:I.25
0.010 !:' N
I---------- C- r"-... 0.008 ci5 I»-.... f----
......
...... 0
0.006
I 0.005 Re -10-' (4 rh G/,u)
0
13
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 I 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Tube outside diameter = 0.375 in = 9.525 x 10-3 m
Hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01237 ft = 3.767 X 10-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.200
Heat transfer area/total volume, C< = 64.4 ft2 /ft 3 = 211.286 m2/m3
Fig. 10-15 Flow normal to in-line tube banks. (Data of Grimison.)
0.30
020 - 010
0.080
0
TO SCALE FOR CASE 0
0.060 ---.-c
A - 0.040 - SPIl\CING X, X,
.........
A 1.25 1.IlO 0.030
B 1.25 2.00
0020 C 1..50 1.50
......c I?. 0 1.IlO 2.00
M ::=::::;::
0.010 N
0.008 c,
0.006 ci5 -...;
0.004 Re x 10-5
1.0 2.0 4.0 10.0 20.0 40.0 100.0

Fig. 10-16 Flow normal to in-linetube banks. (Data of Grimison.) Fig. 10-17 Flow normal to flattened tubes. surface FT-2.
01 0"10
10 1o, 0
6.0 I 8.0 110.0
4.15
r------; 3.60"-----..,
..-- ,
30 4.0
!(4rh G/.Jll
15 2.0
---, >44- '. ---:sa
. .'
---- -
-tt-th
Re )1'10-3
0.6 10.B 1.0
-+---+-
tmc
.....
0.4
247" •
. l' r -p15"t-l
0.03 ~_-+-~+-.I-L~ :.~
, I
BEst INTERPRETATIO
0.004
0.05=tm!ttJ., I
0.30 0.04 0
-+4-~
020 - =4--$-$-
'rh ' ,----L
010 ---+w -ffi-EIi 0
0080 c -
0.060 TO SCALE FOR CASE C
I--- a l￾0.040 +----j-H+++H::=I-+--t""'rq=r-mr+--l-l
0.030 f-.- A "- SPACING X, X,
I A 2.00 1.2!1
0.020 a 2.00 1.!l0
C 2.00 2.00
L.!~ r----..
0.010 <:' o.ooa l:t
0.006 Vi "'"
0.004 --l------l-I--I-l-.l--j...+--I Re II 10- 3
2.0 4.0 6.0 10.0 20.0 40.0 100.0
l-:l
l-:l
-
Tube outside diameter before flattening = 0.247 in = 6.27 xl 0-3 m
Distance between centers parallel to flow = 0.344 in = 8.74 x 10- 3m
Distance between centers perpendicular to flow = 0.222 in = 5.64 x 10-3m
Tube dimension parallel to flow = 0.315 in = 8.00 x 10-3m
Tube dimension perpendicular to flow = 0.127 in = 3.23 x 10-3m
Distance between spacing plates = 4.15 in = 105.4 x 10-3m
Length offlat along tube = 3.60 in = 91.44 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01433 ft = 4.374 x 1O-3m
Total transfer area/total volume, a = 108 ft2
/ft3 = 354.331 x 10- 3m
2/m3
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.386

222 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-18 Flow normal to dimpled flattened tubes. surface FTD-2.
't- ..._ .. 415" ...._----
t----- -_._ .. .- - '1- L :1 315'i" ; r- _. - ,l.60". -----t
--
f--- - "".
:=,..~
..
-
06-_ .
. _.. I- =: c:x::::J ---.i... -
05
~n
~.
<, '-~ 1-1
/2'-"
.04 _.
<,
.03" OIMPLE DEPTH
- r-;
I'--.~ 0
03 ---- .. --,. .
!
I
1
I I
, . 0
.020 -
--
l~:
-----t .. -+ --+-
i
I
I ! I
015 -- 'r I
._- _....-'.
BEST INTERPRETATION i
I
I
I
!
I
i
!
I
... r-, I
,
c.. -+-
~ci5 '-0 i
-/ 008 I
-,
<, o~ 006 T- ho
--- . Re X10-3 (4rh
G/jJ) .005 -
0.4 0506 0.8 10 15 2.0 30 4.0 60 ao 10.0
Tube outside diameter before flattening = 0.247 in = 6.27 x 10-3 m
Distance between centers parallel to flow =0.344 in =8.74 x 10-3 m
Distance between centers perpendicular to flow = 0.222 in = 5.64 x 10-3 m
Tube dimension parallel to flow =0.315 in =8.00 x 10-3m
Tube dimension perpendicular to flow =0.127 in =3.23 x 1O-3m
Distance between spacing plates = 4.15 in = 105.4 X 10-3 m
Length of flat along tube = 3.60 in = 91.44 x 10-3 m
Dimple depth = 0.03 in = 0.76 x 1O-3m
Minimum distance between dimples along tube =0.5 in =12.7 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.016 ft = 4.877 x 1O-3m
Total transfer area/total volume, C<= 108 ft2
/ft 3 = 354.331 m2/m3
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.423

I;.j
Fig. 10-19 Plain plate-fin surface 2.0.
0015
- ----im _. __ _. _ 0- 0:0·
·010 L,4r" ·211 ,...O.~5~ ...........
0008
£:2 '\ -...........-.I"'-.i&- ·006
005
r-r-t￾V) )----8£5" 'NT[ ItPR£ TATIOH
'004
I'-..-L
·003
---.r--.r--:-
·002
Re. 10" (4 •• G/}J)
3 4 5 6 8 10 '5 20 30 40 50 6070
Fin pitch =2.0 per in =78.74 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.750 in = 19.05 x 10-3 m
Fin length = 12.0 in = 304.8 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4Th
= 0.0474 ft = 14.453 X 10-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.032 in, aluminum = 0.813 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, 13 =76.1 ft2/ft3 =249.672 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.606
Fig. 10-20 Plain plate-fin surface 3.01.
015 ---olmOl2'!!
...
L/'Hh< ZI2 l---o7S----J
010-- h 008 I
·006 1\ r-I-
-"- I
BEST INTERPRETATION
0040:
...
V) r--f--I--.
003 -..,r--.I---
·002
Re, '0" (4'hG/JJ)
2 3 4 5 6 8 '0 15 20 30 40 50
Fin pitch = 3.01 per in = 118.5 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.750 in = 19.05 x 10- 3 m
Fin length =12.0 in =304.8 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4Th
= 0.03546 ft = 10.82.x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.032 in, aluminum = 0.813 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, 13 = 98.3 ft2/ft3 = 322.507 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.706

224 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig.10-21 Plain plate-fin surface 3.97.
·0.5
------- 0·2&0" :
_._--- --- ...-- CH'O'
-
"
LA,. < 35·5
·010 t'--...
'008 1\ .......r--
-&..a....
006
005 - f-BEST INTERPRE TATION
004
et -
-e- ......I-.
·003 en r---.
-- r---...
·002
Re '10- 3
(4'. G/lJ.)
2 I 4 5 6 8 10 15 20 30 40 50
Fin pitch = 3.97 per in = 156.3 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.750 in = 19.05 x 1O-3m
Fin length = 12.0 in = 304.8 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0282 ft =8.585 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness =0.032 in, aluminum =0.813 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 =119.4 ft2/ft3 =391.7 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.766

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 225
Fig. 10-22 Plain plate-fin surface 4.00.
I I
.: 030-~
-- -
0.18'
-, L/4rh
• 100 LL -I
0.18' .020 _
-,
•• II
.015 !
-.
-- ~- --
-~-
- I--
I
.010 ---
-- 't f---
------ f-- ---
.008
<,
-- 1----
"" "
--- ----
.006
- -""f'---'./ -- ----:--- f---
12 <,
.005 "-
'I'K(0 t
- --
0- I
.004 ...
--
I
Vl
@P'~
.003 : ./
I i I V -0- I
I I
1
.002 I I I Re x 10-3
(4rh
G/JJ) I , -+-
0.5 0.7 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4_0 6_0 8.0 10.0 15.0
Square tube dimensions = 0.18 in = 4.57 x 10-3 x 4.57 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.015 ft = 4.57 x 1O-3m
Fin area/total area = 0.500
/::,. = test points for constant wall-to-fluid temperature difference tests
0= test points for constant wall temperature tests
x = test points for isothermal friction factor tests
Note: The test core for this surface was built up from square tubes
rather than from plates and fins. Therefore, the data on fin
thickness and area per unit of volume is not pertinent.

Fig. 10-24 Plain plate-fin surface 6.2.
Re.• 10-3
(4rh
Glpl
1.52.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 15.0
Fig. 10-23 Plain plate-fin surface 5.3.
°001 ~!~rh' !0.3 m.
0.040 ~I ----- -,-
a ----- ---t;-- I
0.030 "'- I- 'f", .
r-, 0.020
0.015 "'"
\ ., .
0.01 -- .
0.008 \ --.
r-, )-!-BEST INTERPRETATION ' r---..
10.1 I cry '--- /
.006"
-
I ...
0.005':;
IUl --r-I"- ........
0.001
0.003
Re • 10-3 (4rh
G/)J)
n
l4 ( l5C .6 ( 8 1:0 1.5 20 30 4.0 5.0 6.0 80 100
.030
.015m°lllit
.010
.008
.006 .
005 Ul
~mrt±-z
.004
.003 ' , , , , r
06 08 1.0
T I
0.322" -.--
L~ -
IL/4r
h
) ' 5 I
jii::
Fin pitch = 5.3 in = 208.7 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.470 in = 11.94 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.02016 ft = 6.147 X 10- 3 , ,,
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1Q-3 m
Total transfer area/volume between plates.ji =188 ft2/ft 3 =616.8 m2/m
Fin area/total area=0.719
Fin pitch =6.2 per in =244.1 per m
Plate spacing,b =0.405 in =10.29 x 1O.3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0182 ft =5.54 x 1Q-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.010 in, aluminum = 0.254 x 1O-3m
Total transfer area/volume between plates,ll = 204 ft 2
/ft 3
= 669.3 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.728

Fig. 10-25 Plain plate-fin surface 9.03. Fig. 10-26 Plain plate-fin surface 11.11.
"
TI
I'}.,
, ,
, ,
..
Re x10-3
(4rh G/)l)
0.50.6 I 0.8 I 10 15 2.0 30 4.0 5.0 6:0 I 8.0110.0
,
I ! I- 'l Toi-:-
r-
:--025""1
L/4r 050 ~_.
h=20:6 me---
040 2 __ _ _ '----
, I 1 1 I j
010 I I I I I II I I=--+ ~I I I
-.
--- --_.
.030 --- .-_.
-~" -_.
l' 0 -==-----.L... - _.
.020 --- -_.
--- ----
.015 - (L/4rh)·65 I--O.823~
~ 010 N....
.008 f\ 1--0--,
r-, \
.006
r-,
.005 ;; <,
')-SEST INTERPRETATION-f----
.004 et <;
en
+-' V
.003' 0-0 r--, t----
.002 Re x 10-3
(4rh
G/}J)
0.6 0.8 1.0 15 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 ao 10.0 15.0
to
to
'-l
Fin pitch =9.03 per in =355.5 per m
Plate spacing,b =0.823 in =20.9 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01522 ft = 4.643 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.008 in, aluminum = 0.203 x 10-3 m
Total transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 244 tt 2
/ft 3
= 800.5 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.888
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.250 in = 6.350 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01012 ft =3.081 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 367 ft2/ft3 = 1,204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.756

l'Q
l'Q
00
.050
~
.040 T
1"- - 0.010·
AIR
.030 --
.
FLOW °to
•
l).: -
"i L/4'h 57.8 f-- 0.48"+1
020 -
i 'K· 015 t- -- ._-+ -
<, ,
i
.010 " .008 '\.. _._- - \ f'>-
l'.. \ r---
\
.006:,? J".,.. BEST INTERPRETATION
I_~ /
... <, I
(J) I
.004 -t-
.003 I .....-
"
" Re • 10-3
(4Th
G/)ll
0.4 06 08 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 15.0
Fin pitch = 11.11 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.48 in = 12.19 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01153 ft = 3.518 x 10- 3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.008 in, copper = 0.203 x 10- 3 m
Total transfer area/volume between 'plates,13= 312 ft2/ft3 = 1,024 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.854
Fig. 10-28 Plain plate-fin surface 14.77 .
050 .~ L/4rh • 24.7 t-030~
0
a.:r-..--:-- $
.040
-, --+--
"
_--1._- _
.030
rZ-r--:
- K.
.020 \' .015 K
\ '<,
.010 r-oho
.008 \
BEST INTERPRETATION
.006;;; 1'0.. /
ooset... r-, (J)
.004
t--
I
r-,1-;1-
.00_
Re 010'3 (4rHG/)I)
0.506 os l ro /.5 20 3.0 40 5.06.0 B.O'I'io
Fin pitch = '14.77 per in = 582 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.330 in = 8.38 x 10- 3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.00848 ft =2.59 x 10- 3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total transfer area/volume between plates, 13 = 420 ft2
/ft 3 = 1,378 m2/m3
Fin area/total area =0.844

Kl
Kl
a::>
Fig. 10-29 Plain plate-fin surface 15.08.
.050 f'" -
II .040 ---
K --
--,--
.Q30 1.......:--- ----
'IIi",
---
- "r-... ,--- ceo
~o
" (L/4rhl' 65
.05 r-,r-,
010 '\
\
\ t""> .008 '""- \
}--I--BEST INTERPRETATION
r-, /
.... ""
IJ c...
004 til
f"- .003 Rex10- (4rh
G/ JI)
0.4 0.6 0.8 10 15 20 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0
Fin pitch =15.08 per in =594 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.418 in = 10.6 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.00876 ft = 2.67 x 10-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 414 ft2/ft3 = 1,358 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.870
Fig. 10-30 Plain plate-fin surface 19.86.
r 25'"
r-, . 1C/",""'" ____ ::fj$.-J_
Q[ - - .=-.,..--
r- d '-
030 '"~1'
020 -
015 '\r-,
010
r-,
008 \ - BEST INTERPRETATION ..
r-, ./
106.~ V
.... ......... ioo4(/)
. " r--;1-:-r.-:1-t￾003
Re x 10-3
(4rhG/}/l
.4 c'5 CIS l c.:a 10 1.5 2.0 30 4:0 5060 8.'0 Ioo
Fin pitch = 19.86 per in = 782 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.00615 ft = 1.875 x 10-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 m
Total transfer area/vloume between plates, {3= 561 ft2/ft3 = 1,841 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.849

t-:l
I;.j
C
Fig. 10-31 Plain plate-fin surface 10.27T.t
.080
.060
'i"'.'" sI °
-= .050 rv
"\0
.040 - --
'~
.030
.Jl.P
.020
I'kon
y ".0°
.015
.0\0 - \
-
°
M
.008 - N
- a: &...:: .006 - U5 BEST INTERPRETATION
.005 -
004- """l
.003
-5 Re :4rhGlplxl0
.002 lh .~
.~ 1,1 .2 .3 0 2 3 4 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 10.27 in = 404 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.544 in = 13.8 x 10-3m
Fin length flow direction = 5.00 in = 127 x f0-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01259 ft = 3.835 x 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.010 in, aluminum = 0.254 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, f3 =289.93 ft2/ft 3 = 951 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.863
tBest interpretation to the friction data does not passthrough the cold-core test
points because of a separatecorrection for Kc
' K. as functions of Re.
Fig.l0-32 Plain plate-fin surface 11.94T.t
(L I:rh):
.249
.080
.040
.050
.030-
060
~-
.n
~p
I~ I'-.°
.1675"
+ -
- m
020
.015
-, \"R °
.010 -
-
1"-"1 .008-
i'" -
.006- ...
J
BEST INTERPRETA ION c...
.005 - U5
.004- N
.003 u
.,
Re 1:4rhGlp)x 10
.002 I I 1 I
.2 .3 .4 5.6 .8 \0 I 2 3 4 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 11.94 per in = 470 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.249 in = 6.325 x 10-3 m
Fin length flow direction = 5.00 in = 127 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.009396 ft = 2.870 x 10-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat rantsfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 393.0 ft 2
/ft3 = 1289 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.769

Fig.10-33 Plain plate-fin surface 12.00T.t Fig. 10-34 Plain plate-fin surface 16.96T.t
.250"
.002 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 J
,
.256·
(L/4rh)= 73.8 .080 ii ..L-
.060
~- .050
"~
.1179"
.040
~9
030-
-
J
.020 <,
r-, t?o
.015
<ll>
.010 1< <,x
o•br.
t--.X <-!<'
.008-
""
-
.006- BEST INTERPRETATION
.005- <:' /
N
/
... r\ .004- a..
+-'
C/l
.003-
.....,-<I-u-e -3 uu Re (=4rhGlp) x 10
.002
.~hk 1
10
3 4 5 6 8 .2 .3 2 3 4 5 6 8
k>..
i!o
l'l'l
.3 .4 .5 .6
,.."
I I I I I I I
-3
Re (=4rhGlp)x 10
• M
N
a: -
cil
.i.. +------.+---.j
. II mlo 0
11TT1N,o
.2
Kl
W
-
Fin pitch =12.00 per in =472 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 1O-3m
Fin length flow direction = 2.50·in strips (two = 5.00 in) = 63.5 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter. 4rh
= 0.009412 It = 2.870 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, nickel = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/vulume between plates. {3 = 392.7 ft2
/ft 3 = 1,288 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.773
TSee footnote, Fig. 10-31.
Fin pitch = 16.96 per in = 676.7 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.256 in = 6.50 x 10-3 m
Fin length flow direction =5.00 in =127 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0056524 ft =1.722 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 607.81 ft2
/ft3 = 1994 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.861

232 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-35 Plain plate-fin surface 25.79T.t
.204"
080 (L!4'h),55.3
060 "<' ---1.-_ --
~tl
.050 ""-
~"
.0775"
.040 - -
030'
P.
.020
[\(c
,
.015
Pp
.010 '"'"Cx )"
""-..>lJr.
£2 ."" ...... lG. .008 N...
a.
006 ell
rt /
BEST INTERPRETATION
005
004·
.003 "'0- -3
Re (: 4,h GIf) x 10
002 I I L
.2 .3 .456 Ii.a 2 3 4 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 25.79 per in = 1015 perm
Plate spacing, b =0.204 in =5.182 x 1O-3m
Spl itter symmetrically located
Fin length flow direction = 2.50 in = 63.5 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4'h = 0.003771 ft = 1.151 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Splitter metal thickness = 0.006 in = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, il = 855.58 ft 2
/ft 3 = 2807 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area = 0.884
tSee footnote, Fig. 10-31.

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 233
Fig. 10-36 Plain plate-fin surface 30.33T·t
100 -, (L/4'hl= 52 1;,345:/
....
.080 I'><
~-~
-, ----- -
060 ~I~
.~59~:-: :
Ko .050 -- to! (
.040
x
.030 f'-:
f",x
l' f6 .020
~()
.015
'x P
\ .
.010 -
-
"- .OOB - r-,
-
fist<>../' BEST INTERPRETATION
005 -~
en
.004-
003
-3
Re (=4'hG1f)X 10
.002 11 I I I
.2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .B 1.0 2 3 4 5 6 B
Fin pitch = 30.33 per in = 1194 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.345 in = 8.763 x 10- 3 m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length flow direction = 2.50 in = 63.5 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
0.004009 ft = 1.222 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, aluminum = 0.101 x 10-3 m
Splitter metal thickness = 0.006 in = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, [3 =812.51 ft2/ft3 =2,666 m2/m 3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area = 0.928
tSee footnote, Fig. 10-31.

to
I;,;i
ol:>.
Fig. 10-37 Plain plate-fin surface 46.45T.t
100 I ",.J •830 01
.080 "'-
.060 '\ 0.0'431": '.
.050
r-,
.040 -
.030 'n
.020
~,9 .015 \"
.010 -
- ':'
.008 -
N
et
- ... c /
BEST INTERPRETATION
006 -
Cfl
.005 -
Ie /
.004 -
i
, .003 I
-3
.002
Re (=4rhGlpl,10
II II II .2 .3 .4 .5.6 e 1.0 I 2 3 4 5 6 e
Fin pitch = 46.45 per in = 1829 per m
Platespacing,b = 0.100 in = 2.54 x 1O-3m
Fin length flow direction = 2.63 in = 66.8 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.002643 ft = 0.805 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness=0.002 in, stainlesssteel=0.051 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 1332.45 ft 2/ft3 = 4372 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.837
tSee footnote, Fig. 10-31,
Fig. 10-38 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/8-6.06.t
.080
n~~
r-~
0
r-, 0
-----
.060
d~
I" :=-r--- . 0.375' .050 ...
1\ --- .040 \
--- h o 0
LA'
.030 -
I-
\ .020 \
.015 - BEST INTERPRETATION
t---..1'-
.010 et
...
1'-. J Cfl r--...
008 1-
.006
["-0 r-..
"1l 0
.005 Re ,10'3 (4rIlG/)I)
. I I
0.4 0.6 0.8 10 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10
Fin pitch = 6.06 per in = 238.6 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 1O-3m
Louver spacing = 0.375 in = 9.525 x 1a-3 m
Louver gap = 0.055 in = 1.4 x 10-3 m
Fin gap=0.110 in =2.79 x la-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01460 ft = 4.453 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.153 x la-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 256 ft2/ft3
= 840 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.640

t.Q
'-:l
'"
Fig.10-39 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/8(a)-6.06).
L-~rli .10 ...
.~
080 r-- ..j.3r5"T- \ ..............
-----
D60 .....i""--
050- r-.
ror
fo40
:\
030
BEST INTE RPRET TION
020 I
V
pl5
N r--.r-.
Ii: -.........
...
........ 010 (f)
-s,
r-.... 1008 .. r--.
006 - Re • 10-3
(4rhG/)I)
a-- ...
04 0'\ 06 (8 10 1.'\ '0 '1.0 4.0 60 A.O 100
Fin pitch =6.06 per in =238 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Louver spacing =0.375 in =9.53 x 10-3 m
Fin gap=0.035 in =0.89 x 10-3 m
Louver gap=0.130 in =3.30 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h = 0.01460 ft = 4.453 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 256 ft2/ft3 = 840 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.640
Fig.10-40 Louvered plate-fin surface 1/2-6.06.
.080
~*
..L__ _
I'--.. .~ .-=-=-=::::::r:: _ _
.060 "! ------------=
,---t="-
.050 .50" ,
.040 - --
\
I---
...... 030 ......
\
i
020 i
I I
l>-BEST INT RPRETATION
.015
,
<, // i
i'---r--- I
;:;;
~/
I
010 Ii:
t-, - ...
008 (f) r---
D06 I
....h
005 Re • 10-3 (4rh G/)lJ i
ot-;-r-.;
0.4 050.6 0811.0 1.5 zO 3.0 4.0 60 8.0 100
Fin pitch = 6.06 per in = 239 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 1O-3m
Louver spacing =0.50 in = 12.7 x 1O-3m
Fin gap = 0.110 in = 2.79 x 1O-3m
Louver gap = 0.055 in = 1.4 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydrau lie diameter, 4rh
= 0.01460 ft = 4.453 x 10-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 256 ft2/ft3 = 840 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.640

0)
Fig.10-41 Louvered plate-fin surface 1/2(a}-6.06.
.10
r--.... oLSb)! ~-
.oao IN -!.--- ~.sO·-l
.060
1\ ~o 0
050 ...... \ o......c..
h-!r-: • 0
040
1\
030
i
}aEST INTE ION
020
1/
.015
...f-.,!: /--<1-< r-..--........
010~
f-....
~(/)
.ooa -- -- "'" .006 Re • 10-3
(4rhG/)l) .
o.s os os 1.0 1.5 20 30 4.0 6.0 a.o 100
Fin pitch = 6.06 per in =239 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3m
Louver spacing= 0.50 in = 12.7 x 10-3m
Fin gap = 0.035 in =0.89 x 10-3m
Louver gap = 0.130 in = 3.30 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01460 ft =4.453 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total beat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 =256 ft 2/ft3 = 840 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.640
Fig. 10-42 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/8-8.7.
0.25'
0.08
~rt
r-,
I"'-
0.06
1'-.k,
0.05
o "II'----_____________
\"'-
._-. -- -r
0.04 k •. ........... 0.375 ...
\
""""'-....-IL-.o...-lL.o.
-
"'4...... .
0.03 \
0.02
0.015
r-, 1\ BEST INTERPRETATION
r-,
t>--
~r-
~/
0.010
0.006 (/)
0h;-. t-,....
I •• 0.005 Re xlo-f (4rhG/Jl) I
0.4 0.6 08 11.0 1.5 io 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Fin pitch =8.7 per in = 343 per meter
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3m
Louver spacing = 0.375 in = 9.53 x 10-3m
Fin gap=0.060 in =1.52 x
Louver gap = 0.055 in = 1.40 x 10-3m
Flow passage hvdraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01196 ft = 3.650 X 10-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 307 tt 2
/ft3 = 1007 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.705

to
--t
Fig. 10-43 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/8(a)-8.7.
.10
oss - .080 --=-"; -~ -- .-
........ .
"....... •
060 • ,1,-----------
.050 '\ ';;'-", L .,J ':-1
.... \
e .375 .25
.040
f9-'!-,.......
\
-I'-"t--e
.030 ,\
/ BEST INTERPRET TION
.020 1/
/
015 --- t<o ..... ;,.... I
tt
-- c- r....... .OOB
......t:- 006 Re x 10'3 (4rh G/}J) e
.005 04 0.5 0.6 I O.B 1 1.0 1.5 20 3.0 40 6.0 8.0100
Fin pitch =8.70 per in =343 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Louver spacing= 0.375 in = 9.35 x 10-3 m
Fin gap = 0.035 in = 0.89 x 1O-3m
Louver gap=0.080 in =2.03 x la-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01196 ft = 3.650 x 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = :307feltt3 = 1007 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.705
Fig. 10-44 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/16-11.1.
100
t-.25·...,
aBO \jD~~ r-,
T~~
060 1\ "t--....
~. ---1.1875;'1- - .
....
050 1\ -......~
.040 '\ r￾I"-
.030 -) BES INTE ATI N
r-, 1/
h...
015 M
N Nf-..
...
.010 (Jl ...
.OOB
.006 Re x 10-3 . (4rhG!)l)
o~
040.50.6 1"1 A 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Louver spacing = 0.1875 in = 4.763 X 10-3 m
Fin gap = 0.035 in = 0.89 x 10-3 m
Louver gap = 0.055 in = 1.4 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01012 ft = 3.084 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 367 ft2/ft3
= 1,204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.756

to
'-:l
00
Fig. 10-45 Louvered plate-fin surface 1/4-11.1.
.100
___~.Z;"~
.080 ,., .
.060 \ ."
...
.050 1\ ......
.040 r--
--..;
1\ '- .030
I) BEST INTERPRETATION
.oZO
..... /
.......
.015~ K
It t-~
r-... .010 U5 '""'-
.008 -..... .. r--
.006 Re '<10-3
(4 rhG/)Il
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 ZOO 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 i1e
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in =6.35 x lo- 3m
Louver spacing = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Fin gap = 0.035 in = 0.89 x lo- 3 m
Louver gap =0.055 in =1.4 x lo-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01012 ft = 3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 367 ft 2
/ft 3 = 1,204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.756
Fig. 10-46 Louvered plate-fin surface 1/4(b)-11.1.
r-O.25~
.10 0.055'
~~- -;-. .08
r--... ~~ -
060
.......... J-0.Z5~ .
'+- \
.050 -....r--... .040 \
-...I-"-r--. \
.030
!>-BES IN ERPRE ATIO~
.oZO
. 1:'--. V
.015 r<-,....,
...
Q.
... r--. .010 Vl
• :l:c-. 008 o 0
r:-
006 IRe l 10-3 (4rt,G/,ll)
0.4 0.50.6 0.8 1.0 I" 2.0 3.0 4.0 F;'O R.O
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Louver spacing = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 1O-3m
Fin gap = 0.035 in = 0.89 x 10-3 m
Louver gap = 0.055 in = 1.4 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01012 ft =3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, Ii = 367 ft 2/ft3 = 1,204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.756

Fig.10-47 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/8-11.1.
0.25'
008
-,
r-, 0.035' F r1
r-,
006
0.05
004 -
\ I'--..
0.03 -..I--r-t-o l-t-F￾0.02
;-..
0015
"'- BEST INTERPRETATION
r-,
t--..
~Ol
---
I-- £:' .............
0008 ':
t;~r~ -r.-r--.
I
Re
, r-,....
0005
I .l . I
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.010.0
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing.b'= 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3m
Louver spacing = 0.375 in = 9.53 x 10-3m
Fin gap=0.035 in =0.89 x 1O-3m
Louver gap=0.055 in =1.4 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter. 4rh =0.01012 ft =3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in. aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
to Total heat transfer area/volume between plates. {3.= 367 ft2/ft3 = 1.204 m2/m3
""tl:i Fin area/total area= 0.756
Fig. 10-48 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/8(b)-11.1.
oss"
.oeo ~ '-
- ----
r-L~~. -
060 t>.. --.., ____ .375 - _
050 I'>, .
- i
I
040 \
,
I
i
030 I
---- t-.- - \ ! :.'
.! : I :
<, I
/
INTERPRETATION
1015 i""--1'-<1""-
.;-
! i r Q: ---.< I
; I I '
.010 en i
i , '
.J--.. f--- i ..... DOe .....,
t-.... ---c--
006 t--.
Re <10 (4rhG/)J) .
04 05 06 I oa I 1
10 I
1.5 2.0 30 4.0 6.0 ao
Fin pitch =11.1 per in =437 per m
Plate spacing. b = 0.250 in = 6.35 xl 0-3m
Louver spacing = 0.375 in = 9.53 x 10-3m
Fin gap = 0.035 in = 0.89 x 10-3m
Louver gap = 0.055 in = 1.4 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter. 4rh =0.01012 ft =3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates. 13 = 367 ft2/ft3 = 1.204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.756

,..."...
0::;;:
-....".
Fig. 10-49 Louvered plate-fin surface 1/2 -11.1 . Fig. 10-50 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/4-11.1.
K
-00" o.os" =fi
oso ~- - - -;;:-- -~-
!'-- 050 ... - -I -,
1"-.
040 -
.030
r-,
1\ r-;
020
1\ ......
015
......... I)-BEST INTERPRETATION I
r---j--.. I
010' -
.........
008 et
I----- <Ii -
006 - +
-- - ------ --_.-
------
.005 r--.
o
004 Re· 10-3 (;rh G/)ll I ' •
0.4 ols 0.6 0:811:0 I.S 2.0 30 4.0 "'-'('I i ,,1('1 10.
; rr-r.
\
\
01o--ok
/
Re ,,10- 3
(4rh
05 0.6 I 0.8 I 1.0 I.S 2.0 30 4.0 I 6.0 I B.O 110.0
to
""c
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 1O-3m
Louver spacing=0.50 in =12.7 x 1O-3m
Fin gap = 0.035 in = 0.89 x 10-3m
Louver gap=0.055 in =1.4 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01012 ft =3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness =0.006 in, aluminum =0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 =367 ft2/ft3 =1,204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.756
Fin pitch =11.1 per in =437 per m
Plate spacing, b =0.250 in =6.35 x 1O-3m
Louver spacil'\g= 0.75 in = 19.05 x 1O-3m
Fin gap =0.05 in =1.27 x 1O-3m
Louver gap = 0.04 in = 1.02 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01012 ft = 3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 367 ft2/ft3 = 1.204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.756

I'Q
-
Fig. 10-51 Louvered plate-fin surface 3/4(b)-11.1.
r
25
0 "1
060 . <: 050 0 7T: _- _ -=:--.. -_ -
"
"
r--.-- f..--.75'-------..j :.
040
'+-- Ii'-
030
1\ I
.020 -...i-"-j-<>r-. .015
.....- DBEST >-.".. INT RPRET TION
......,
.010 '"
f--- N
r-...... 008£
f--eIl t>---
I~
006 11' --. 005 t￾o"""0
004 Re .10'3 (4rhGlp)
04 05 06 I 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 60 8.0 110
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Louver spacing= 0.55 in = 19.05 x 1O.3m
Fin gap=0.05 in =1.27 x 1O-3m
Louver gap=0.04 in =1.02 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01012 ft =3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, P= 367 ft2/ft3 = 1,204 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.756
Fig. 10-52 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/4(s)-11.1.
0
_ .
1-.25"-..1
080 1t 070 r-,
060 t"--' • cP--__--
...........--.-I-O.25~ - ---
.050
r--.-. .040 1\ "8-...; .....
"-...e
030
1\ '---k
I-...". 020 l\ r-. T If TERPR TAT! N
DiS "r--k
V
t-
<,
010
£
008 ell
p.-... 006
.~ t- .005 Re ,,10'3 (4rhG/y l
0.4 05 f)'" f).A t.O 1.5 2.0 . 3.0 4.0 6.0 I A.O 100
Fin pitch = 11.1 per in = 437 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.25 in = 6.35 x 1O-3m
Fin length = 0.25 in = 6.35 x 1O-3m
Flow pasasge hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01012 ft = 3.084 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, P=367 ft2/ft3 =1,204 m2/m'
Fin area/total area = 0.756

Fig.l0-53 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/8-15.2.
150~
.~ .- ," 1-.414"-1 1ij
<, .066"{::=::==::
~-
M.. 031·~=
- ""
APPROX.
.080 11'
.060 -........-. .....
\ ..........
.050
.040 1\
.030 BEST INTERPRETATION
1/
020 IJ.
----.t-o- I
.015
... h i
Q.. 10-0-
I
...
Vl
010
00
.008 I Re -10-' (4rhG/,u) 0
0.3 04 0.506 0.81 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.06.0 8.0
Fin pitch = 15.2 per in = 598 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.414 in = 10.5 x 1O-3m
Fin length = 0.125 in = 3.18 x 1O-3m
Fins staggered symmetrically
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.00868 ft = 2.647 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 417 ft2
/ft3 = 1368 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.873
Note: Fin leading and trailing edgesslightly scarfed from fin-cutting
operation. Friction factors may be lower with clean fins.
Fig. 10-54 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/8-13.95.
ifr "1.m ·r
072"1.. -_-
.200 T -=-=-
-
-
-
-
'" -
-
- - -
.150
.100 "
r-..
.080 --e-.
...
.060
.050
.040 BEST INTERPRETATION
.030
""1:"J-. -e..
.020 % "-le.(
.t ,...",.""
.015 ...
Vl
v~ __
.010 I
.• 000-
Re ·10 (4r. G'i')
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 O.B 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 B.O 10.0
Fin pitch = 13.95 per in = 549 per m
Plate spacing,b =0.375 in =9.525 x 1O-3m
Fin length = 0.125 in = 3.175x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.00879 ft = 2.68 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.010 in, aluminum = 0.254 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 381 tt 2
/ft 3 = 1,250 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.840
Note: The fin surface area on the leading and trailing edges of the
fins havenot been included in areacomputation.

Fig. 10-55 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/8-15.61. Fig. 10-56 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/8-19.86.
--i I/Ei
0.09S"
......
- -
.100 -
I
.......
.080 I'ln. 0.050" ==-
'" "1._- ...
T--
..
.060 - "'--
.050
JO-t>,
.040
,""
I'
.030
'UI i+t
.020 10.....
1'-0 BEST INTERPRETATION t'o-to.
M
N h.. 010 tt ro,
.OOS ci5 """0 .......
Re(a4rhGt,u.lxI0-3
v-
.006
0.2 03 04 05 06 0.8 LO 2D 30 4.0 5.0 60
_-1° 250"t--
Ed
lIS"
-j-~
-
0.064"-:L =-
,-
-H-.,L It-1-pf
~-f~-T' i: I
J.--·r
--t
-
M
:.
35 I I : i I I
v, =f==f==t-t-tti' -·~-i~~r-·
02 03 04 0.5 06 I O:r;:- 20
200
.030
.100
.OSO
.020
.010
.OOS
.060
.050
.040
N
"'"
Fin pitch = 15.61 per in = 615 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.250 in = 6.35 x 10-3 m
Fin length = 0.125 in = 3.175 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.007817 ft = 2.38 x 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, il = 471.9 ft2/ft3 = 1,548 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.809
Fin pitch = 19.86 per in = 782 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.098 in = 2.49 x 1O-3m
Fin length = 0.125 in = 3.175x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.00506 ft = 1.54 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in= 0.102 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, il = 687 ft2
/ft 3 = 2254 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.785

t-o Fig. 10-57 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/9-22.68.
1/9'
.200 -i0.301' t-- f-
-
-
II - -
-
0044l =;
,-
.100
--- .080
----+-
.060
050
.040
.030
.020
~ .~--"-l- 0..
U5
.010
.008
Fin pitch = 22.68 per in = 893 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.301 in = 7.65 x 1O-3m
Fin length = 0.111 in = 2.8 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h
= 0.005692 ft = 1.735 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.0004 in = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 630.5 ft 2
/f t 3 = 2,069 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.885
Fig. 10-58 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/9-25.01.
-11/ 9\ _ --j o.~vo'f-
.200 -
- -
II <,R. -
- ------
-
-
-
-
0040'-J.
- 1-
.100 <,
.080 r;;:
.060 f'll1o.
.050
.040
1\
I
1\ l"-
.030
I BE ST INTERPRETATION
I
.020
I
f--.,
I
...
II 0..
U5
.010 -3 l---.
v
.008
Q2 0.3 0.4 Q5 0.6 08 1.0 20 3.0 4.05.0
Fin pitch = 25.01 per in = 985 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.200 in = 5.08 x 10-3 m
Fin length = 0.111 in = 2.8 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.004905 ft = 1.50 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in = 0.102 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 719.4 ft 2
/f t 3 = 2,360 m
2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.850

Fig. 10-59 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1{9-24.12. Fig. 10-60 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1{10-27.03.
.020
}-- 8 EST INTERPRETATION
1/10' f0250 i
.200 "
-i ......
I
<, 0.037"'1. ------ , -------
- T-
.100
.080
",''''''
.060 lit:
.050
.040 1\
.030
)--BEST INTERPRETATION
.020
s,
et
Vi »-,
-3 .010 Re(~rhG~)'IO
.008 0.2 0.3 0.40.50.6 0.81 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5
00750·
----< f￾B
2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0
..
--+j 1/9" r-
-
00415"-=t,==---=
.~'I~
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 I 0.81 1.0
Vi
.008
oro =t--+--nm R~('4rh~p)~10,~ I I I I I l:r-n I I I I
.200
i
.100
.080
.060
050
!
.040
.030
to
Fin pitch = 24.12 per in = 950 per m
Plate spacinq, b = 0.075 in = 1.91 x 10-3 m
Fin lenqth =0.111 in =2.8 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.003966 ft =1.209 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness =0.004 in =0.102 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, fJ = 862.7 ft2/ft3 = 2,830 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.665
Fin pitch = 27.03 per in = 1064 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.250 in = 6.38 x 1O-3m
Fin length = 0.10 in = 2.54 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.004669 ft =1.423 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, fJ = 751.7 ft2/m3 = 2,466 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.887

Nl Fig.l0-61 Strip-finsurface1{10-19.35.
"'" O'l
Fig.l0-62 Strip-finplate-finsurface 1{10-19.74.
0.050e·
.150 -+j 1/10'1- --f f-
"I --
... , --
.100 -- --
-- L __--
.Qeo ""-
1'>1..--. --
.060 '0:0507·
I"'<
.050 Ihl •
\
.
.040
.030
1\
.020
'().
BEST INTERPRETATION
I')
.... '-'
N 1'0- "0
~"'b .010
(f) - """"n-
.008 '-0-
Re v
.006 I " II I
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.50.6 0.8 1.0 2.0 3.0
0.0750'
¥
B
, 1
20
--f VIO'r--
I
I
I
INTERPRETATION
rri , '
+-
Ifl - • I
I
3.0 4.0 5.0
I
I
., III I
L _ • i :
II
''-<l T , !
I
1
I
:-Ii I i I I
l"b
i
02
1
.015
.100
.080
.060
·050
.040
.030
.020
...
Q.
.010
.008
Fin pitch = 19.35 per in = 762 per m
Platespacing, b = 0.075 in = 1.91 x 10-3m
Fin length = 0.10 in =2.54 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.004602 ft = 1.403 X 10-3m
Fin metal thickness =0.004 in =0.102 x 10-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates,{3 = 758.9 ft2/ft3 = 2,490 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.611
Fin pitch = 19.74 per in = 777 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.0508 in = 1.29 xl 0-3 m
Fin length =0.10 in = 2.54 x 10- 3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
0.0040 ft = 1.219 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.002 in = 0.051 x 10- 3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, f3 = 923 ft2/ft3 = 3028 m2/m3
Fin area/totaI area = 0.508

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 247
Fig. 10-63 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 3/32 -12.22.
r-, 1--485"-"
.10 r-, +Lf_
" L_-_-
.08 '<,
0.082-T ==== f.-- <;
- i'L-..... .06-
\ --
.05
\
r---.........
....... 04 f-,o.
\ 03
I
.02
<, .-/
BEST INTERPRETATIO N_
-........, /
.015
...........
et
.01- til
<, f-----
.008
or--.
0
0
006 Re x10· (4r.G/Jl)
.005 Q506 Q811.0 1.5 20 3.0 4.0 5060 80 10.0
Fin pitch = 12.22 per in = 480 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.485 in = 12.3 x 10-3 m
Fin length =0.094 in =2.4 x 1O-3m
Fins staggeredsymmetrically
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01120 ft = 3.41 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, copper = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 340 tt 2
/ft 3 = 1,115 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.862
Note: Fin leading and trailing edgesslightly scarfed from fin-cuning
operation. Friction factors may be lower with clean fins.

248 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-64 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/2-11.94(D).
.100
.080 a. ......L_- ..... -i"~ i"_
.060 "'-
"'l<Q .050 - - 1"<..
.040
i'4f>1
.030
.020 d'-.,
'i9.. \
.015
'&.. \
lr,..
0>leo
.010 -
-
n./ BEST INTERPRETATION
.008 -
-£2
.006 -:t e￾re-e.. 005 - ell
'~
~1:
.004-
.003
-s
.002 Re (:4rhGIJ'-h 10
,6 11!0 I
I
2 .3 .4 .5 2 3 4 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 11.94 per in = 470 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.237 in = 6.02 x 10-3 m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length flow direction = 0.500 in = 12.7 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.007436 ft = 2.266 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Splitter metal thickness = 0.006 in= 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/colume between plates, (3 = 461.0 ft2/ft3 = 1512 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area = 0.796

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 249
Fig.l0-65 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1{4-15.4(0).
r· 2 O
'" .080 f--»o--l ..l __--
-
<, 01'· ---
- --
060 T----
---
050 - f--- ------ "
...
.040 - f---
,~
~o
.030
020 --...
s, I
...
.015 BEST INTERPRETATION
.010 -,
<:'
N
'e.. .008 et "'"
+-'
'CI)
.006 .~
.005
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8
Re
1.0
• 10->
1.5 2.0 3.0
(
4.0 5.06.0 - 8.0
Fin pitch =15.4 per in =606 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.206 in = 5.23 x 10-3 m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length = 0.250 in = 6.35 x to-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.00527 ft = 1.605 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x to-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 642 ft2/ft3 = 2106 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area=0.816

250 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-66 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1{6-12.18(D}.
.178" .oS53"
.L-1I i
200 .-== . -.
.0821"==
.150
-.
..
.100 'I!I
.080 ...
"l
-
.060 M
"" .050
'" 0
.040
"fs .030 .... "'-a-
"" \
, -,
.020 r-.o -'"'P'
.015 -
Q INTER!'I E AI I IN
.010 -
;:1
- 0: q.,
.008 -
.., 'b-.
CIl Pl..
-
.006-
.005 Re (s 4rhG/}Alx 10··
j"t>ro-
.004
.2 .3 .4 .5.61 1,1 0 3 4 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 12.18 per in = 480 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.353 in = 8.97 x 10-3 m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length flow direction = 0.178 in = 4.52 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.008648 ft = 2.63 x 10-3m
Fin metal thickness =0.004 in, aluminum =0.102 x 1O-3m
Splitter metal thickness = 0.006 in = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 422.4 ft 2
/f t 3 = 1.385 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area = 0.847

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 251
Fig. 10-67 Strip-fin plate-fin sur1ace1/7-15.75(0).
.300 f-j r- \;304"1
200 -,-- -= ----
.150
.063S· =:: :-
.100
.080 "'a.
.060- -
....
1li .050
040 ..,
~
.030 0
.....
.020
"'1: K
.015- INTERPRETATION '" BEST
N
....
a..
.010 - eli
008= "' ........
-
"<: .006 - ""'-
ODS -s
Re (:4'h G/j1)XI0
.004
I 1 1
11.1
.2 .3 .4 .5 .6 0 2 3 4 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 15.75 per in = 620 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.304 in = 7.72 X 10-3 m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length flow direction = 1/7 in = 3.63 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.006790 ft =2.07 x 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, aluminum = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Splitter thickness = 0.006 in = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 526 ft2/ft3 = 1,726 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area = 0.859

252 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-68 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/8-16.00(0).
.200 +-+~-Hf-+-If+--+-1
.150
.100
.125" .255"
-I I-H
-,--= -L_-IJ 0625" _
"\
INTERPRETATION
.020 -
/
.015 -
.010 - a': ....
- ci5 0-
.008 - '<7
- -
.006
.005 -, Re 1=4rhG/fllx 10
.004
t~ 1 .I .2 .3 .4 .8 1.0 2 3 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 16.00 per in = 630 per m
Plate spacing, b =0.255 in =6.48 x 10-3m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length flow direction = 0.125 in = 3.175 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
0.006112 It = 1.862 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Splitter metal thickness = 0.006 in = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 = 549.5 ft2/ft3 = 1,804 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area = 0.845

Heat Transfer and Flow-Function Design Data 253
Fig. 10-69 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/8-16.12(0).
.100 --lIZ' f- J- 206'1
<, ...L_-
080 rq 062'" -
'-- ,. ..
-
- ..
060
'~
-
.050
...
040 "'-
""""II
.030
I
BEST INTERPRETATION
.020 "-
'"'5(
.015 ['b;'&... f'.,
.010
.008
Q
c:
c,
- vutr-.
....
(/l
006
005 I Re • 10-' (4r. G.?'-')
03 0.4 0.50.6 08 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.060 8.0
Fin pitch; 16.12 per in ; 635 per m
Plate spacing, b ; 0.206 in ; 5.23 x 10-3 m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length; 0.125 in; 3.175x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h
; 0.00509 ft > 1.552 x 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness; 0.006 in, aluminum; 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, 13; 660 tt 2
/ft3
; 2,165 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area; 0.823

254 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-70 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/8-19.82(0).
.125" .205"
.200
~1
.150
-. .0505" -=
.100 r-,
.OSO ...
.060
- -
.050 .....
.040 \ r--
\
-,...
.030
.020 ... }-oSEST INTERPRETATION
I'""l"- I
.015 - K .......... .010 -
- C-
.OOS - ... u.,.,...
r.f)
-
006
.005
.,
Re (" 4rhG/}"1 I '0
.004
.2 .3 .4 .L~ .~ Iio 2 3 4 5 6 8
Fin pitch = 19.82 per in = 780 per m
Plate spacing,b =0.205 in =5.21 x 1O-3m
Splitter symmetrically located
Fin length flow direction = 0.125 in = 3.175 X 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.005049 ft = 1.537 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness =0.004 in, nickel =0.102 x 10-3 m
Splitter metal thickness = 0.006 in = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, IJ = 680 ft2
/ft3 = 2,231 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area= 0.841

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 255
Fig.l0-71 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1{8-20.06(0).
.125" .201"'
-L~'
.200 --r _= -
.0499" _ :
./50
.100
.080- .....,
.060 [1l.,
.050
.040 \ .030
0
\
........
.020 'Ii
f'lll r-r- BEST INTERPRETATION
.015-
.010 - ... k -
. a..
008- +-'
(/)
-
006-
-s
.005 Re (a4'hG1p)' 10
.004 1 ,1 .2 .3 .4 .5.6 0 3 4 5 6 B
Fin pitch = 20.06 per in = 790 per m
Plate spacing,b =0.201 in =5.11 x 1O-3m
Splitter length flow direction = 0.125 in = 3.175 x 10-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh 0.004892 ft = 1.491 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, aluminum = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Splitter metal thickness = 0.006 in = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, 13 =698 ft2/ft3 =2,290 m2/m3
Fin area (including splitter)/total area = 0.843

I:<l
'"
Fig.10-72 Strip-fin plate-fin surface 1/B-16.12(T). Fig. 10-73 Wavy-fin plate-fin surface 11.44-3/8W.
Ilr-~
, , , ["<.....0
Re x 10-' I (4rhG/)l)
MIMlm w
H--L
f-..
'f\--
o I'i--
INTERPRETATION
\
I"
111 I -r....~o_
rl"'i-j..
+_+--+-+-+++-1__+_+-_rE5 T
0100 -lo'''I- r 0.'" --.,
"
-
fWA "l 0062(-'- -
0080 '" -,=---
.....kl.
0060
0.050 "i'b
0040 -
1\ 'u1:r
"'"
r--.
0030
V
V
BEST INTERPRETATION
I
I
0.020 "'b V
0015
'~Ib
I
I
e1
0010 N
et "..,..
0008 Ul 'u( r--
0006
0005 Re x 10·' (4rhGI)')1
02 03 0.4 050.6 08 1.0 15 20 30 40 5060 80
Fin pitch = 16.12 per in = 635 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.314 in = 7.98 X 10-3 m
Splitters evenly spaced
Fin length = 0.125 in = 3.175 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.00514 ft =1,567 x 10-3m
Fin metal thickness 0.006 in, aluminum =0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heattransfer area/volume between plates, {J = 650 ft2/ft3 = 2.133 m2/m3
Fin area (including sPlitters)/total raea=0.882
Fin pitch = 11.44 per in = 450 per m
Plate spacing, b = 0.413 in = 10.49 X 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01060 ft =3.231 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between platse, {J = 351 ft2
/ft 3 = 1,152 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.847
Note: Hydraulic diameter basedon free-flow area normal to mean
flow direction.

to
""-1
Fig. 10-74 Wavy-fin plate-fin surface 11.5-3j8W.
•375" .. t-
...........
087"L~
.100
,080 •
1\ r-_ >--
.........,,, .375"
.060
"'f:~" ...
.050
~o
040 I
urt·", I I I
1'l'!2.
...
,030
I
020 fe-=
015
....k
...
0... I>.... 010 U) u
""'-
;--..
008
He ,10" (4r.G/;t)
0
.006
03 04 050.6 08 10 1.5 20 3.0 4.0 506.0 8.0 10.0
Fin pitch =11.5 per in =453 per m
Plate spacing,b = 0.375 in = 9.25 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.00993 ft =3.023 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.010 in, aluminum = 0.254 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, il =345 ft2/ft3 =1,138 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.822
Note: Hydraulic diameter based on free-flow area normal to mean
flow direction.
Fig. 10-75 Wavy-fin plate-fin surface 17.8-3j8W.
.0562" r r --I II 10 ..
08
r-,
.......
-~
i~
06
l"--k
.... .0775" APPROX.
.05 '\ .--...........1..,.
04
03 \ --
\
r-..t--
.02 BEST INTERPRETATION
015 /
'l!--I'o--
!:2
010 'k o
f--- .... o "<,
.008 (/)
0 .......
f-- f----l- Re • 10-' (4rh G/,lJ) 0
006 ,
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 30 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Fin pitch =17.8 per in =701 per m
Plate spacing, b =0.413 in =10.49 X 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.00696 ft = 2.123 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.006 in, aluminum = 0.152 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, il =514 ft2
j ft3 =1.686 m2/m3
Fin. area/total area = 0.892
Note: Hydraulic diameter basedon free-flow area normal to mean
flow direction.

oe
Fig. 10-76 Pin-fin plate-fin surface AP-1.
.10
.08
-... '"
0
f--.....
\
.060 \
Jf J
.050 _ t-¥,O..-DIA.
1\ 040
I~
, '+ .
BE TIINT RPF E ATION 0"', :0: '
.030 1+-+-1 / II F" . LOW ....
.020
--f-
.015 <,
c:
en 1---10... .010
to...
r .
.
008 1 Re. 10-3
(4rh
G/jJ)
0.4 050.6 0.8 1.0 15 2.0 3.0 4.0 6~O 8.0 10.0
Pin diameter = 0.04 in, copper = 1.02 x 1O-3m
Pin pitch parallel to flow =0.125 in, = 3.175 x 10-3 m
Pin pitch perpendicular to flow = 0.125 in = 3.175 x 10-3 m
Plate spacing,b =0.24 in =6.10 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01444 ft =4.404 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates,il = 188 ft2/ft3 = 616.8 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.512
Fig. 10-77 Pin-fin plate-fin surface AP-2.
I
.050 I
........"" ,
.,
-
0
.100
.080
.060 lIftr"' ,~ ..,'- 'itt' ,
.050 om' .~
.040 1_ 1_ 1.59.-- ...
.030. .- i., 'c .
WIN. FREE-FLOW AREA
020 c: I
en I'-- .015
h-...
.010 Re • 10-3 (4 rhGQl)
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Pin diameter = 0.04 in, copper = 1.02 x 1O-3m
Pin pitch parallel to flow = 0.096 in = 2.44 x 10-3 m
Pin pitch perpendicular to flow = 0.12 in = 3.05 x 1O-3m
Plate spacing,b =0.398 in = 10.1 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
0.01172 ft = 3.576 X 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, il = 204 ft2
/ft3 = 669 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.686
Note: Platesto which the pins are attached are corrugated with the
pins soldered into the corrugations.

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 259
Fig. 10-78 Pin-fin plate-fin surface PF-3.
---- -- --, .. -'~' --_.
.080
.060
<,
-
.........I---..... .050 !
-..I-- ...... ...
.040 I
030 - f-- 8EST INTE\RETATION
094"H 020 \
H·c••"
mb m
.015
£
031"
t--- "...... .
.010 0- I--.. <, ... . .150· en <,
008
.006 t-1------., '"';-
Re .10-3 (4rhGlp)
0.15 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 n.6 n.8 I." I.~ 20 30 40 !I:O 60
Pin diameter =0.031 in, aluminum =0.79 x 1O-3m
Pin pitch parallel to flow = 0.062 in = 1.53 x 10-3m
Pin pitch perpendicular to flow = 0.062 in = 1.53 x 1O-3m
Plate spacing, b = 0.750 in = 19.1 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.00536 ft = 1.636 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, (3 =339 ft2/ft3 =1,112 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.843

260 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-79 Pin-fin plate-fin surface PF-4(F).
b20
--...,...--
.
0 < •
kJ.l5 .. ...
- /
b.D
b08
8EST7
""l r 1(' '''-I I--
b.o6 INTERPR\TATION .
I-- oHl"!oO .
P.05 \ --f-.t 0.011" ,
1\ .~
I,
0.03
M
N
002 et
+-'
Vl
00.5 !l>--f!>-. 01--
Re)(10-5
0.6 oe 1.0 1.5 2D 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 8.0 I. 15.0 2cio
Pin diameter = 0.065 in, steel = 1.65 x 1O-3m
Pin pitch parallel to flow =0.125 in =3.175 x 10-3 m
Pin pitch perpendicular to flow =0.199 in =5.055 x 1O-3m
Plate spacing, b = 0.502 in = 12.75 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.0186 ft = 5.66 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 140 ft2/ft3 = 459 m2/m3
Fin arealtotal area = 0.704
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in spaces transverse to flow.

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 261
Fig. 10-80 Pin-fin plate-fin surface PF-9(F).
0.100
.' . .
0.080
.... -
..... .. .
\
0.060 f\
\ 0.040
BEST INTERPRETATION
-~(jl-L 111._.-; 0.030 -III :
-$1-CIl
•
10....•
0.020 ~-e_-l.
t2 I"-- -.J l
N
I-. 0.01'-
...
c... --...
ci5 t--..r-r-.,
0.010
........
O.OOB
,.....
Re x 10-3 GIll> -;--
I 2 3 4 6 B 10 20
Pin diameter = 0.065 in, steel = 1.65 x 10-3
in
Pin pitch parallel to flow = 0.196 in = 4.98 x 10-3 m
Pin pitch perpendicular to flow = 0.238 in = 6.05 x 1O-3m
Plate spacing,b = 0.510 in = 12.95 x 10-3 m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0297 ft =9.042 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 96.2 ft 2
/ft 3 = 316 m2/mJ
Fin area/total area= 0.546

I:{)
O'l
I:{) Fig. 10-81 Pin-fin plate-fin surface PF-10(F). Fig. 10-82 Perforated-fin plate-fin surface 13.95(P).
15.0
U'qv
...".
1"'-.:.
Of s;r
r=--=-j t:H
]~TI I I I I I 007'·0'"
Re • 10" (4r, G0)
I 1 I I I I
0.50.6 0.8'0 15 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.06.0 8.0 10.0
...
030
010
020
cry
008 N
.t...
006 en
015
.004
.005
060
.050
.040
15
01"'"
~.f" Hi1fl1~ 10
ko.,'c.lT
INTERPRETATION i! I I I
Re x 10"(4 I,G/.) _L.LIJT" I I
2 3 45bflj'.::lIO
1
8 910
rF~L tit .
.-J-l-+j
008 I I I I I I
0000,
0000
0000
I 440·
M
.02 "N
.tl-U+:=*~~ttnTI-r
·015 til
Fin pitch = 10.95 per in =431 per m
Fin perimeter =0.141 in, steel =3.58 x 1O-3m
Fin cross-sectionarea = 0.00104 in2 = 0.671 x 10-6m2
Plate spacing,b =0.440 in =11.18 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01426 ft = 4.343 x 1O-3m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, Ii = 214 ft2/ft3 = 702 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.693
Fin pitch = 13.95 per in =510 per m
Plate spacing, b =0.200 in =!'.08 x 1O-3m
Fin center material perforated with 0.079 in = (2 x 10-3 m) diameter holes
spaced32 per in2 (4.96 x 106 per m2
) on square pattern (16% open)
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.00822 ft = 2.504 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness =0.012 in, aluminum =0.305 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, Ii = 381 ft2/ft3 = 1,250 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.705
Area in rim of holes included in fin area

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 263
Fig. 10-83 Finned circular tubes, surface CF-7.34.
0060
cce ho.
,..r-....
0.04 -
- I
...
0.030
I
SEST T1mJ.. 0.020
QOt5 -.l-- - --iiii. I'a-: .... \
= _---L ___
..... '),...
o.•d{ O'IWl!- ....
0.010 ,-I . a
I--
0.008 N ..... I-- 0.. ""0 0.006 en '~
' ....
0.005
0 .....b....
0.004 Re x10-' 0
(4r.G/jI)
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 15.0 20.0
Tube outside diameter = 0.38 in = 9.65 x 10-3m
Fin pitch = 7.34 per in = 289 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.0154 ft = 4.75 x 10-3m
Fin thickness (average)! =0.018 in, aluminum =0.46 x 10-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.538
Heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 140 ft2/ft3 = 459 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.892
Note: Experimental uncertainty for heat transfer results possibly
somewhat greater than the nominal ±5% quoted for the other
surfaces because of the necessity of estimating a contact
resistance in the bimetal tubes.
t Fins slightly tapered.

264 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-84 Finned circular tubes. surface CF-8.72.
0.060
~t... 0050 t-ot-o
0.04 r--.-
\
- -
1\
"'"
I-..! LLL.
0.030
BEST INTERPRETATION '1
-.~
\\I.\M\\\\\- 0.02 <, 1/ 'll, -~ '4
0.015
- • ---l. ....
- • ...
0.010
-
N
.....
0.008 et -::::
- cil
0 .~f.
0.006
0.005
0.00
Re x 10·' (4r,Glpl
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 ao 6.0 8.0 IO.n
Tube outside diameter = 0.38 in = 9.65 x 10-3 m
Fin pitch = 8.72 per in = 343 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01288 ft =3.929 x 10-3m
Fin thickness (average)t =0.018 in, aluminum =0.46 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.524
Heat transfer area/total volume, '" = 163 ft 2
/ft 3 =535 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.910
Note: Experimental uncertainty for heat transfer results possibly
somewhat greater than the nominal ±5% quoted for the other
surfaces becauseof the necessity of estimating a contact
resistance in the bimetal tubes.
tFins slightly tapered.

1:0
O'l
Fig. 10-85 Finned circular tubes. surface CF-8.72(c).
-.. /....Q
o. 1'-<,....
0.050 / r---.
0.040 /
-.,- -
0.030 BEST _
INTERPRETATION
0.020 - .: -.-----
Iil-h ", \
_J. .'I1~I~ _I '~jF~\
0.015 o.ooo'i OJ"7~ 0.011'''''
Jo---.- 0010 '" ........,.
f-- N
0008
... or---..
Q.
... 01'-- f-- l/l --t￾0.006
0.005
0.004
Re x 10-' (4r.G/JI)
0.4 0.5 0.6 O.B 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 BD 10.0
Tube outside diameter = 0.42 in = 10.67 x 10- 3 m
Fin pitch =8.72 per in =343 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.01452 ft =4.425 x 1O-3m
Fin thickness (average) t =0.019 in, copper =0.48 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.494
Heat transfer area/total volume, 0/ =136 ft 2
/ft3 =446 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.876
tFins slightly tapered.
Fig. 10-86 Finned circular tubes. surface CF-ll.46 (friction data only).
0.200 -/-- 1----- '-- --1---_ 1--+---
0.150
I
--
I I 1m11. '\M- I
.
,
- ci .;---f jj A
0.100 1\1\\1.v,Ml ~._-+--
-- '_...1.
o.oeo . '-' _IWP. I. i! ....087>'-11- 0.0004-
0.060
0
0.050 :-:
.... ~t-- I r BEST INTERPRETATION
0.040 --I￾0.030 ~-
0.020- -
Re x 10-' (4r. G/ 1')
0.4 0.50.6 O.B 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 B.O 10.0
Tube outside diameter = 0.38 in = 9.65 x 1O-3m
Fin pitch = 11.46 per in '= 451 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h =0,00976 ft =2.979 X 10-3 m
Fin thickness (average) t =0.016 in, aluminum =0.41 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.510
Heat transfer area/total volume, 0/ = 209 ft2/ft3 = 686 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.931
Note: Heat transfer data not included for this surface because of the
large contribution of contact resistancebetween the bimetal
tubes and the large uncertainty in evaluating this resistance.
tFins slightly tapered.

266 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-87 Finned circular tubes, surface CF-7.0- 5/8J. (Dataof Jameson.)
0.060
0.040 -
- r--r--
0.030 I-
~fi'--
0.020
-' + +',
...............r--. - -t 0.645--:1•
..-\r+•.•••. I--. 0.010
....... 0.008 -...
r---- ...
0.006 0..
+oJ
(fl
Re _10- 3
r---
1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 AD Inn 70 30
Tube outside diameter =0.645 in =16.38 x 10-3 m
Fin pitch = 7.0 per in = 276 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0219 ft =6.68 x 1O-3m
Fin thickness =0.010 in =0.25 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, 0 = 0.449
Heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 82 ft2/ft3 = 269 X 10-3 m
Fin area/total area = 0.830
Note: Minimum free-flow area is in spaces transverseto flow.

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 267
Fig. 10-88 Finnedcircular tubes. surface CF-8.7-5/8J. (Data of Jameson.)
, 1.232"
SPACING s
--
TO SCALE FOR "A"
0.070 B_
0.060
0.050
A --
0.040 F:::::: - t---t--
0.030
0.020
AM_ 8
r---.. --r-.... 0.010 N
I--- Q:
+-' r- 0.008 Vl <, I---
0.006 +-----jl----J-- 8 L848-
1.0 2.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Tube outside diameter =0.645 in =16.38 x 1O-3m
Fin pitch =8.7 per in =343 per m
Fin thickness=0.010 in =0.25 x 10-3 m
Fin area/total area= 0.862 A B A
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01797 0.0383 ft. 5.48 x 10-3
Free·flowarea/frontal area, a = 0.443 0.628
Heat transfer area/total volume, Cl =98.7 65.7 ft2/ft3 324
Note: Minimum free-flow areais in spaces transverse to flow.
B
11.67x10-3m

268 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-89 Finnedcircular tubes, surface CF-9.05-3/4J. (Dataof Jameson.)
0.ll6
.s
F-t.... r--""-t￾O~
-~
---
0
0.03 ::0- f'==,"'"
=::::::::::
-lc~"
- :::::::...
- s -e- ...L1.6 3 -R'I;--
002
- .... (l74".~ ..,
- L
70 SCALE FOR "A"
0.010
;;;- sPACING S L
.......
-t~ ...
,~
---
A 1.557" 1.7S"
............
--
.......
--
8 <982" 1.75"
-.-:=::: -- --8 r- c C 2.725" 1.75· -.-:=:::
AEj
Re·IO·s 1° D 2.725" oaer
0.004
3.0 6.0 I B.O [ L••2" 137S" 1.5 2.0 4.0 10.0
A 8
0.01681 0.02685
5.131 x 10-3 8.179 x 10-3
Tube outside diameter =0.774 in =19.66 x 1O-3m
Fin pitch = 9.05 per in = 356 per m
Fin thickness = 0.012 in = 0.305 x 10-3 m
Fin area/total area= 0.917
Flow passage hydraulic
diameter,4rh
C 0 E
0.0445 0.01587 0.02108 ft
13.59 x 10-3 4.846 X 10-3 6.426 x 10.3 m
Free-flow area/frontal
area,a = 0.455 0.572 0.688 0.537 0.572
Heat transfer areal
total volume, 0/ 108 85.1 61.9 135 108 ft2/ft3
354 279 203 443 354 m2/m3
Note: Minimum free-flow area in all cases occurs in the spaces transverse
to the flow, except for D, in which the minimum area is in the diagonals.

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 269
Fig. 10-90 Finned circular lubes, surface CF-8.8-1.0J. (Dataof Jameson.)
0.060
0.050
8_
--r--
0.040 - -I￾0.030 -A __
r--
J~"
0.020 --
'-
r--I--I-
:S +
8 -. +
0.010 .....A
r---- 2.~. 0.1l~7·-I1-+-~.01z"
,.......,
..... - r-; TO SCALE -.-
0.008 0-
....
............ <,
-
Vl
<, !PACING l- s
I-....... 0.006 A 1..,.-
...... <, "-
B 5-0n'
Rex
1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Tube outside diameter =1.024 in =26.01 x 1O-3 m
Fin pitch = 8.8 per in = 346 per m
Fin thickness = 0.012 in = 0.305 x 10-3 m
Fin area/total area = 0.825
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h
= 0.01927
5.893 x 10-3
0.0443 ft
13.21 x 10- 3 m
Free-flow/frontal area, a
Heat transfer area/total volume, a
0.439
91.2
299
0.642
58.1 ft2/ft3
191 m2/m3
Note: minimum free-flow is in spacestransverse to flow.

W
-I
o
Fig.10-91 Finned circular tubes, surface 8.0-3/8T.
1- •
0.060 1_ T_"0-- ~, -
q:> - lLJ.:: -
-
0040 ~- tr- .
t--r-r-
. 8 0402"
OJl3O- -
----- -r--
0.020 t--
......r---...
.............
0.010
r--
C)
........
0.008
~c. """ .............
0.006 ci5 r-;
-.;;;::
-.......
r-....
0.004 t￾I
10-'
0.4 0.6 ()8 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Tube outside diameter = 0.402 in = 10.2 x 1O-3m
Fin pitch =8.0 per in =315 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01192 ft = 3.632 X 10-3 m
Fin thickness = 0.013 in = 0.33 x 10-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.534
Heat transfer area/total volume, 0/ = 179 ft 2/ft3 = 587 m2/m3
Fin arealtotal area= 0.913
Note: Minimum free-flow area in spaces transverseto flow.
Fig. 10-92 Finned circular tubes, surface 7.75-5/8T.
-~.
0.060 <f --+ ,.:;.-=
- A (:L
0.040
0.030- -
~~".- 1.15 w-.':'·
I-t-.. r-r￾0.020
----r----
-----
-- --t-r-r￾0.010 r--..
I--- Q
...... 0.008-
r--
--...r-,
0.006 Vl
r---...
r--t----. I r- 0.004
I
Re. 10-3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 I 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 1.0
Tube outside diameter =0.676 in =17.17 x 1O-3m
Fin pitch = 7.75 per in = 305 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh =0.0114 ft =3.48 x 1O-3m
Fin-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.481
Heat transfer area/total volume, 0/ = 169 ft2
/ft 3 = 554 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.950
Note: Minimum free·flow area in spaces transverseto flow.

Fig. 10-93 Finned flat tubes, surface 9.68-0.87. Fig. 10-94 Finned flat tubes, surface 9.1-0.737-8.
6.0 I 8.01100
10.06'
I I I
: II I
-ll-QJld
m-.
I
1m
I~
~r.
""
P020tttmt' I
0.05'0 ----;:;;.0.120"
0.04
0.436" r=1.06"=-.t== m 10.
-'--~= t-, 0.67 ..I\.-
0.030 0.103"
I
0
-
......
0.020
'" .
I \'
O.Oll \
""--..e..
r--h.
0.010 h
J. \-l:IEST INT RF RI Hl I(~
M~
r-,
/
0.006"'...
10-
0.005 Vi r-, I
0.004 ""10-;l- I
l￾0 t:- 0
I Re x 10-5
(4rh G/)J)
040.50:6 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 Anlmo
Fin pitch = 9.68 per in = 381 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.01180 ft = 3.597 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, copper = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.697
Total heat transfer arealtotal volume, ex = 229 ft2/ft3 = 751 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.795
Fin pitch = 9.1 per in = 358 per m
Flow passagehydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01380 ft = 4.206 X 10- 3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, copper = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.788
Total heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 224 ft2/ft3 = 735 m
2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.813
l'O
---l
-

l'Q
.....
l'Q
Fig. 10-95 Finned flat tubes, surface 9.68-0.87-R.
O~"
~.I20
m
0050 0 0436" T
I k L-- e=:=:::>
P040 f". i ..- 0.870"
... ~0J3'
I 025"
0030
- \ r---.....
0020
1
1\ t'" r- "
0.015
V-BEST INTERPRETATION
0010b".K
-
0.006 h
r----j '" -.J'...
r-----.. POO6
Ie.. !";;-.
POO5, U5 o ;--.
1--:-
0004
I
00
10.003
1
Re x
0'1 0.6 06 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 40 5.06.0 60 100
Fin pitch = 9.68 per in = 381 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h
= 0.01180 ft = 3.597 x 10- 3 m
Fin metal th ickness=0.004 in, copper =0.102 x 10- 3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.697
Total heat transfer area/total volume, ex =229 ft2/ft3 =751 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.795
Fig. 10-96 Finned flat tubes, surface 9.29-0.737-SR.
0100" =
G==
.Q6()
....... o.55" = j
050 I.-= 18 I--o:r<r
o.~ .. 0
040 .
-
<,
030 '-- ..
\
f-. r-.. "-t'--<..,fo..,
mo
015 BEST INTERPRETATION
........
-,1'-..,
.010 / <,
-~ p-.."..,
.008 et .~
-+-'
en .~
.OQ6
;-
.005 I ..
.004,1. Re.IO-· (4rhGljJ)
0.4 0.506 0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 I io
Fin pitch = 9.29 per in = 366 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01352 ft = 4.12 x 1O-3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, copper = 0.102 x 1O-3m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.788
Total heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 228 ft 2
/f t 3
= 748 m2/m3
Fin area/total area = 0.814

Heat Transfer and Flow-Friction Design Data 273
Fig. 10-97 Finned flat tubes, surface 11.32- 0.737-SA.
0.100" =
;
"f¢==
0060
.
I " = K. 055 ~0737"1c:z:=1 J
0050 ..1.--.-=-018" 1.-0.79'
I
.....
"- . to.~ -1 ~08"
0.040
1- -a., 0.030
I \ .
002_l
.....
\ BEST INTERPRETATION
0015\ "
i'-
........ /
-c
-.,.
I-:--... 0006U5
o I r-..... 0.005
..... I
. 0
0.004 Re X 10-3_
0
0.506
I
0.8 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0
Fin pitch = 11.32 per in = 446 per m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh
= 0.01152 ft = 3.510 x 10·3m
Fin metal thickness = 0.004 in, copper = 0.102 x 10-3 m
Free-flow area/frontal area, a = 0.780
Total heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 270 ft2/ft3 = 886 m2/m3
Fin area/total area= 0.845

274 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-98 Crossed-rod matrices, in-line stacking; rod diameter d = 0.375 in = 9.525 X 10-3 m.
6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10' 4
6 8 la' 4
Porosity p Transverse pitch X,
1I x 0.832 4.675
31· 0.766 3.356
51· 0.675 2.417
61 o 0.602 1.974
I-<> 71" 0.500 1.571
;;:,-IZ..
-v--
- :-----....I---
I-- -o-
'----....,r-
•
.1. . .
JdL
;:l ',d
0..
ci5
.....e--.
~
0
Re
1.0
0.8
0.1
0.08
0.6
0.4
0.04
0.06
0.2
0.02
0.01
0.008
0.004
4
0.006

Heat Transfer and Flow-Function Design Data 275
Fig.10-99 Crossed-rod matrices, staggered stacking; rod diameterd = 0.375 in = 9.525 X 10-3 m.
6 8 10' 4 6 8 10' 4 6 8 10'
- -
k--. -
- P---.u. ---..r----
q - .....1-<1--
...
...... -0.--., h..
-r--, :::::::
-v-;
-o-c,P--f<>
'o-e
*'.-
"
T --- ---
:; . . .
<t
U; ~ f<..- x,d
---...:--1--
I :::::1'0-
I
r--- f;;::::[:o.
Porosity p Transverse pitch Xl r-::;
lS • 0.832 4.675 h:-........ 38 • 0.766 3.356 '<c, r-,
58 v 0.675 2.417
I- 68 c 0.602 1.974
o
I- 78 • 0.500 1.571
I I I I I
I I Re
0.02
0.2
0.6
0.4
1.0
0.8
0.1
0.08
0.04
0.06
0.01
0.008
0.004
4
0.006

""-l
O':l Fig.10-100 Crossed-rod matrices. random stacking; rod diameter d = 0.375 in = 9.525 X 10-3 m.
)
I
I
t--
-
r=:---......
I
t--
-------
I
.::::r-o--e-; - t- --
I
i
<, .~
,~
•
""'-..l': ,
s-,
~
1'-.."'" F::::,..
Porosity p Transverse pitch t--f:>"" ;:,-
1R x 0.832 4.675 f:;: 1"1:<: Q:. 2 R • 0.817 4.292 U; ~t: 3 R • 0.766 3.356
4 R c 0.725 2.856
5 R • 0.675 2.417
6 R 0 0.602 1.974
7R c 0.500 1.571
I I I I
I I I I I Re;(4 r
h
GI!")
j
1.00
0.8
0.2
0.60
0.4
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.00
la' 4 6 8 10 3
4 6 8 10' 2 4 6 8 10'

Heat Transfer and Flow-Function Design Data 277
Fig. 10-101 Plate-fin matrix501MOD.
0.02SOV-- .1. __
__
--I 1/20"f--
OOOS
40 60 SO '00 200
T-+
0.001"
000'"
600 800
Fin pitch = 35.74 per in = 1407 per m
Plate spacing, b =0.0262 in =0.665 x 10-3 m
Fin length = 0.05 in = 1.27 x 1O-3m
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h = 0.001885 ft = 0.575 X 10-3 m
Fin metal thickness = 0.001 in = 0.0254 x 1O-3m
Plate metal thickness =0.001 in =0.0254 x 10-3 m
Total heat transfer area/volume between plates, {3 = 1976 ft2
/f t 3 = 6,483 m2/m3
Total heat transfer area/volume, a = 1902 ft2
/ft3 = 6240 m2/m3
Porosity p = 0.896
Fins and plates unbrazed. Surface area includes curved portion of fins near
the plates. Matrix is composed of a stack of fins and plates held together
by pressureo

278 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. 10-102 Glass ceramic matrix505A.
0507 CELL BOUNris
030~ 1.. 1i?ZB
0206
~\
T r
c
0- -1
I-- _I
I ,
0.100
008 "b.
1333__
K>.05~
Re
'Q
&
1 '\
0039 337
~,:'\.
02~
i\:~
~~
'" I~
'"
t--l N
til
I
0010 o FRICTION FACTOR
f------ 0 StPr 2/3 000
f------ -- THEORY FOR EQUI- -c
f------ LATERAL TRIANGULAR
000 TUBES.®
~Re
30 50 8'01100 360 500 )0
Passage count = 526 per in2 = 815,300 per m2
Porosity, p = 0.794
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4rh = 0.00247 ft = 0.753 x 1Q-3 m
Cell height/width, d/c = 0.731
L/4rh
= 101
Total heat transfer area/total volume, a = 1285 ft 2
/ft3 = 4216 m2/m3

Heat Transfer and Flow-Function Design Data 279
Fig. 10-103 Glass ceramic matrix519.
-+
Passage count = 1,683 per in2
= 2,608,655 per.m2
Porosity, P = 0.8105
Flow passage hydraulic diameter, 4r h
= 0.00197 ft = 0.600 x 10-3m
L/4rh=127
Total heat transfer area/total volume, ex = 1,646 ft2
/ft 3
= 5,400 m2/m3

Appendix A Material Properties
To facilitate use of the design data in this book a number of charts and tables of
material properties are presented in this appendix. It is not intended that this be
an exhaustive compilation of properties, since such compilations are readily
available, but rather the properties of a representative group of solids, liquids,
and gases are presented so that feasibility studies of heat exchangers can be
made without seeking information elsewhere.
The thermal conductivities of a large group of metals used in heat exchanger
construction are presented in Fig. A-I. For the most part, these have been
plotted from the data given by Eckert and Drake [IJ. The properties are pre￾sented on the left-hand side in English units and on the right hand side in SI
units.
Figures A-2 to A-17 give the properties of a number of commonly used gases
and liquids in English units. The properties of the same fluids in SI units are
presented in tabular form, Tables A-I to A-14.
Figures A-2 to A-7 present the properties of a representative group of gases,
all at 1 atm pressure. These are based primarily on Bureau ofStandards Circular
564 [2] but have been supplemented from other sources. For most applications
these gases may be treated as perfect gases for which the transport properties
are independent of pressure, and the densities may be determined from the
perfect gas equation of state Pip = (R/M)T, where R isthe universal gas constant,
1,545 ft . lbf/(lbm. mol· OR), and M is the molecular weight, Ibm/Ibm' mol.
The properties of steam are given in Fig. A-8 for two different pressures.
These are based on the Russian data presented by Nowak and Grosh [3].
The properties of saturated water (Fig. A-g) are based on Ref. 2. The liquid
oxygen and liquid hydrogen properties (Figs. A-IO and A-H) are plotted from
the data of Scott [4].
Figures A-12 to A-14 include the properties of some characteristic hydrocar￾bon fuels and oils, plotted from data in Ref. 5. The data on liquid metals (Figs.
A-15 to A-17) have been taken from the Liquid Metals Handbook [6].
The tables of properties in SI units are all taken from Kays and Crawford [7].

Appendix A Material Properties 281
These have in a number of cases been taken from more modern sources, and
where there are minor discrepancies with the data in the figures, the tabular
data should be considered more definitive.
Figures A-I8 to A-20 contain correction factors that may be used to deter￾mine the density and specific heats of humid air and of the products of combus￾tion of air and hydrocarbon fuels. In each case the factor is to be multiplied by
the density or specific heat of dry air at the temperature and pressure of the
mixture. Although the labels on these figures are in English units, they are in fact
nondimensional and may be used with SI units.
Table A-I5 contains a convenient set of conversion factors for SI and English
units, as well as some of the older units whose use still persists (gallons, centi￾poise, miles, etc.).
REFERENCES
1. Eckert, E. R. G., and R. M. Drake: "Heat and Mass Transfer," McGraw-Hili Book
Company, New York, 1959.
2. Hilsenrath, J., et al: Tables of Thermal Properties of Gases, Natl. Bur. Standards Cire.
564, November, 1955.
3. Nowak, E. S., and R. J. Grosh: An Investigation of Certain Thermodynamic and
Transport Properties of Water and Water Vapor in the Critical Region, Argonne Natl.
Lab. ANL 6064,1959.
4. Scott, R. B.: "Cryogenic Engineering,' D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Princeton,
N.J., 1959.
5. "Aero-space Applied Thermodynamics Manual," Society of Automotive Engineers,
Inc., February 1960.
6. "Liquid Metals Handbook," R. N. Lyon, editor-in-chief, U.S. Government Printing
Office, 2d ed., 1952; NAVEXOS P-733 (rev).
7. Kays, W. M., and M. E. Crawford: "Convective Heat and MassTransfer," McGraw-Hili
Book Company, New York, 1980.

282 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table A-1 Properties of Air at P = 101.325 kPa
M= 28.966
T,K p, kg/m' u, Pa : S v, m2/s cp kJ/(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
100 3.5985 70.60 -07 19.62 -07 1.028 92.20 -04 0.787
150 2.3673 10.38 -06 43.85 -07 1.011 13.75 -03 0.763
200 1.7690 13.36 -06 75.52 -07 1.006 18.10 -03 0.743
250 1.4119 16.06 -06 11.37 -06 1.003 22.26 -03 0.724
263 1.3421 16.70 -06 12.44 -06 1.003 23.28 -03 0.720
273 1.2930 17.20 -06 13.30 -06 1.004 24.07 -03 0.717
283 1.2473 17.69 -06 14.18 -06 1.004 24.86 -03 0.714
293 1.2047 18.17 -06 15.08 -06 1.004 25.63 -03 0.712
300 1.1766 18.53 -06 15.75 -06 1.005 26.14 -03 0.711
303 I.l650 18.64 -06 16.00 -06 1.005 26.37 -03 0.710
313 I.l277 19.11 -06 16.95 -06 1.005 27.09 -03 0.709
323 1.0928 19.57 -06 17.91 -06 1.006 27.80 -03 0.708
333 1.0600 20.02 -06 18.89 -06 1.007 28.51 -03 0.707
343 1.0291 20.47 -06 19.89 -06 1.008 29.21 -03 0.706
350 1.0085 20.81 -06 20.63 -06 1.008 29.70 -03 0.706
353 1.0000 20.91 -06 20.91 -06 1.008 29.89 -03 0.705
363 0.9724 21.34 -06 21.95 -06 1.009 30.58 -03 0.704
373 0.9463 21.77 -06 23.01 -06 1.010 31.26 -03 0.703
400 0.8825 22.94 -06 26.00 -06 1.013 33.05 -03 0.703
450 0.7844 24.93 -06 31.78 -06 1.020 36.33 -03 0.700
500 0.7060 26.82 -06 37.99 -06 1.029 39.51 -03 0.699
550 0.6418 28.60 -06 44.56 -06 1.039 42.60 -03 0.698
600 0.5883 30.30 -06 51.50 -06 1.051 45.60 -03 0.699
650 0.5431 31.93 -06 58.80 -06 1.063 48.40 -03 0.701
700 0.5043 33.49 -06 66.41 -06 1.075 51.30 -03 0.702
750 0.4706 34.98 -06 74.32 -06 1.087 54.10 -03 0.703
800 0.4412 36.43 -06 82.56 -06 1.099 56.90 -03 0.703
850 0.4153 37.83 -06 9I.l0 -06 1.110 59.70 -03 0.703
900 0.3922 39.18 -06 99.90 -06 1.121 62.50 -03 0.702
950 0.3716 40.49 -06 10.90 -05 1.131 64.90 -03 0.705
1,000 0.3530 41.77 -06 11.83 -05 1.141 67.20 -03 0.709
1,100 0.3209 44.4 -06 13.8 -05 1.160 73.2 -03 0.705
1,200 0.2942 46.9 -06 15.9 -05 1.177 78.2 -03 0.705
1,300 0.2715 49.3 -06 18.2 -05 1.195 83.7 -03 0.705
1,400 0.2521 51.7 -06 20.5 -05 1.212 89.1 -03 0.704
1,500 0.2353 54.0 -06 22.9 -05 1.230 94.6 -03 0.704
1,600 0.2206 56.3 -06 25.5 -05 1.248 10.0 -02 0.703
1,700 0.2076 58.5 -06 28.2 -05 1.266 10.5 -02 0.702
1,800 0.1961 60.7 -06 31.0 -05 1.286 11.1 -02 0.701
1,900 0.1858 62.9 -06 33.9 -05 1.307 11.7 -02 0.700
2,000 0.1765 65.0 -06 36.8 -05 1.331 12.4 -02 0.699
2,100 0.1681 67.2 -06 40.4 -05 1.359 13.1 -02 0.696
2,200 0.1605 69.3 -06 43.2 -05 1.392 13.9 -02 0.693
2,300 0.1535 71.4 -06 46.5 -05 1.434 14.9 -02 0.688
2,400 0.1471 73.5 -06 50.0 -05 1.487 16.1 -02 0.681
2,500 0.1412 75.7 -06 53.6 -05 1.556 17.5 -02 0.673

Appendix A Material Properties 283
Table A-2 Properties of O2 atP = 101.325 kPa
M= 31.999
T,K p, kg/m' Il,Pa's v,m2/s cp kJ/(kg . K) h, W/(m' K) Pr
100 3.9906 76.80 -07 19.25 -07 0.947 90.50 -04 0.804
150 2.6186 11.27 -06 43.04 -07 0.918 13.76 -03 0.754
200 1.9557 14.65 -06 74.91 -07 0.914 18.24 -03 0.735
250 1.5598 17.77 -06 11.39 -06 0.912 22.54 -03 0.718
300 1.2998 20.67 -06 15.90 -06 0.918 26.74 -03 0.710
350 I.1Bl 23.37 -06 20.98 -06 0.292 30.56 -03 0.710
400 0.9749 25.89 -06 26.56 -06 0.942 34.20 -03 0.713
450 0.8665 28.28 -06 32.64 -06 0.956 37.70 -03 0.717
500 0.7799 30.54 -06 39.16 -06 0.971 41.20 -03 0.720
600 0.6499 34.70 -06 53.39 -06 1.002 48.00 -03 0.725
700 0.5571 38.50 -06 69.11 -06 1.031 54.40 -03 0.730
800 0.4874 42.10 -06 86.37 -06 1.054 60.30 -03 0.736
900 0.4333 45.40 -06 10.48 -05 1.074 66.10 -03 0.737
1,000 0.3899 48.50 -06 12.44 -05 1.090 71.70 -03 0.737
1,100 0.3545 51.40 -06 14.50 -05 1.103 77.10 -03 0.736
1,200 0.3250 54.20 -06 16.68 -05 1.115 82.10 -03 0.736
1,300 0.3000 56.90 -06 18.97 -05 1.125 87.10 -03 0.735
1,400 0.2785 59.50 -06 21.36 -05 1.134 92.10 -03 0.733
Table A-3 Properties of N2 at P = 101.325 kPa
M= 28.018
T,K p, kg/m' u, Pa . S V, m2/s cp' kJ/(kg . K) h, W/(m' K) Pr
100 3.4800 68.70 -07 19.74 -07 1.072 94.10 -04 0.783
150 2.2890 10.00 -06 43.69 -07 1.047 13.85 -03 0.756
200 1.7107 12.86 -06 75.20 -07 1.043 18.26 -03 0.734
250 1.3657 15.46 -06 11.32 -06 1.039 22.22 -03 0.724
300 1.1381 17.86 -06 15.69 -06 1.039 25.98 -03 0.714
350 0.9755 20.08 -06 20.58 -06 1.040 29.39 -03 0.711
400 0.8536 22.14 -06 25.94 -06 1.044 32.52 -03 0.711
450 0.7587 24.08 -06 31.74 -06 1.049 35.64 -03 0.709
500 0.6829 25.90 -06 37.93 -06 1.056 38.64 -03 0.708
600 0.5691 29.27 -06 51.44 -06 1.075 44.10 -03 0.713
700 0.4878 32.35 -06 66.32 -06 1.097 49.30 -03 0.720
800 0.4268 35.20 -06 82.48 -06 1.122 54.10 -03 0.730
900 0.3794 37.86 -06 99.80 -06 1.145 58.70 -03 0.739
1,000 0.3414 40.36 -06 11.82 -05 1.167 63.10 -03 0.746
1,100 0.3104 42.70 -06 13.76 -05 1.186 67.20 -03 0.754
1,200 0.2845 45.00 -06 15.82 -05 1.204 71.30 -03 0.760
1,300 0.2626 47.10 -06 17.93 -05 1.219 75.40 -03 0.761
1,400 0.2439 49.20 -06 20.17 -05 1.232 79.70 -03 0.761

284 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table A-4 Properties of H2 at P = 101.325 kPa
M= 2.016
T,K p,kg/m' /l,Pa's v, mt/s c" kJ/(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
100 0.2457 42.10 -07 17.14 -06 11.16 67.60 -03 0.695
150 0.1638 55.70 -07 34.01 -06 12.61 98.60 -03 0.712
200 0.1228 67.80 -07 55.20 -06 13.52 12.80 -02 0.716
250 0.0983 79.00 -07 80.39 -06 14.03 15.60 -02 0.711
300 0.0819 89.40 -07 10.92 -05 14.27 18.15 -02 0.703
350 0.0702 99.40 -07 14.16 -05 14.38 20.33 -02 0.703
400 0.0614 10.91 -06 17.76 -05 14.49 22.12 -02 0.715
450 0.0546 11.84 -06 21.69 -05 14.49 23.89 -02 0.718
500 0.0491 12.74 -06 25.93 -05 14.50 25.64 -02 0.720
600 0.0409 14.50 -06 35.41 -05 14.53 29.10 -02 0.724
700 0.0351 16.10 -06 45.87 -05 14.60 32.50 -02 0.723
800 0.0307 17.70 -06 57.64 -05 14.71 36.00 -02 0.723
900 0.0273 19.20 -06 70.34 -05 14.83 39.40 -02 0.723
1,000 0.0246 20.70 -06 84.26 -05 14.99 42.80 -02 0.725
1,100 0.0223 22.20 -06 99.40 -05 15.17 46.20 -02 0.729
1,200 0.0205 23.60 -06 11.53 -04 15.36 49.50 -02 0.732
1,300 0.0189 25.00 -06 13.23 -04 15.57 52.80 -02 0.737
1,400 0.0175 26.30 -06 14.99 -04 15.80 56.20 -02 0.739
Table A-5 Properties of He4 at P = 101.325 kPa
M=4.003
T,K p, kg/m' /l,Pa's v, mt/s Cp' kJ/(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
100 0.4878 97.80 -07 20.05 -06 5.194 73.60 -03 0.690
150 0.3252 12.50 -06 38.44 -06 5.194 96.90 -03 0.670
200 0.2439 15.10 -06 61.91 -06 5.193 11.80 -02 0.665
250 0.1951 17.60 -06 90.20 -06 5.193 13.70 -02 0.667
300 0.1626 19.90 -06 12.24 -05 5.193 15.50 -02 0.667
350 0.1394 22.20 -06 15.93 -05 5.193 17.20 -02 0.670
400 0.1220 24.30 -06 19.93 -05 5.193 18.90 -02 0.668
450 0.1084 26.40 -06 24.35 -05 5.193 20.50 -02 0.669
500 0.0976 28.40 -06 29.11 -05 5.193 22.10 -02 0.667
600 0.0813 32.20 -06 39.61 -05 5.193 25.10 -02 0.666
700 0.0697 35.90 -06 51.52 -05 5.193 28.00 -02 0.666
800 0.0610 39.40 -06 64.62 -05 5.193 30.70 -02 0.666
900 0.0542 42.80 -06 78.97 -05 5.193 33.40 -02 0.665
1,000 0.0488 46.20 -06 94.71 -05 5.193 36.00 -02 0.666
1,100 0.0443 49.40 -06 11.14 -04 5.193 38.50 -02 0.666
1,200 0.0407 52.50 -06 12.91 -04 5.193 41.00 -02 0.665
1,300 0.0375 55.60 -06 14.82 -04 5.193 43.40 -02 0.665
1,400 0.0348 58.60 -06 16.82 -04 5.193 45.70 -02 0.666

Appendix A Material Properties 285
Table A-6 Properties of CO2 at P = 101.325 kPa
M= 44.010
T,K p, kg/m' II, Pa . s v, m'/s cp ' kJ(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
220 2.4728 11.19 -06 45.25 -07 0.778 10.83 -03 0.804
250 2.1652 12.63 -06 58.33 -07 0.806 12.89 -03 0.790
300 1.7967 14.99 -06 83.43 -07 0.852 16.62 -03 0.768
350 1.5369 17.26 -06 11.23 -06 0.897 20.50 -03 0.755
400 1.3408 19.42 -06 14.48 -06 0.938 24.41 -03 0.746
450 1.1918 21.50 -06 18.04 -06 0.977 28.34 -03 0.741
500 1.0726 23.48 -06 21.89 -06 1.013 32.28 -03 0.737
600 0.8939 27.20 -06 30.43 -06 1.075 40.30 -03 0.726
700 0.7662 30.60 -06 39.94 -06 1.125 48.70 -03 0.707
800 0.6704 33.90 -06 50.57 -06 1.168 56.00 -03 0.707
900 0.5959 36.90 -06 61.92 -06 1.204 62.10 -03 0.715
1,000 0.5363 39.70 -06 74.02 -06 1.234 68.00 -03 0.720
1,100 0.4876 42.40 -06 86.96 -06 1.259 73.30 -03 0.728
1,200 0.4469 44.90 -06 10.05 -05 1.280 78.00 -03 0.737
1,300 0.4125 47.40 -06 11.49 -05 1.298 82.50 -03 0.746
1,400 0.3831 49.70 -06 12.97 -05 1.313 86.70 -03 0.753
Table A-7 Properties of Steam
r.:c 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600
Density, kg/m'
p= 100 kPa 0.460 0.416 0.379 0.348 0.322 0.300 0.280 0.263 0.248
p= 7,500 kPa 37.4 30.8 27.1 24.4 22.4 20.7 19.3
Viscosity, Pa . s
p= 100 kPa 16.2 18.2 20.3 22.4 24.5 26.5 28.6 30.6 32.6
p = 7,500 kPa 19.7 22.1 24.4 26.6 28.8 30.9 32.9
Thermal
conductivity,
mW/(m' K)
p= 100 kPa 33.4 38.3 43.5 49.0 54.7 60.7 66.9 73.3 79.9
P = 7,500 kPa 64.1 60.6 62.9 67.5 72.8 78.7 84.8
Specific heat,
kJl(kg' K)
P= 100 kPa 1.979 1.990 2.010 2.037 2.067 2.099 2.132 2.166 2.201
P = 7,500 kPa 4.686 3.228 2.726 2.512 2.420 2.386 2.379
Prandtl number
P= 100 kPa 0.959 0.947 0.938 0.930 0.924 0.917 0.910 0.905 0.898
P = 7,500 kPa 1.443 1.179 1.057 0.990 0.956 0.936 0.924

286 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table A-a Properties of Saturated Liquid Water
T, 'C p, kg/m' u, Pa . S v, m2/s cp,k]l(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
om 999.8 17.91 -04 17.91 -07 4.217 0.562 13.44
10 999.8 13.08 -04 13.08 -07 4.193 0.582 9.42
20 998.2 10.03 -04 10.05 -07 4.182 0.600 6.99
30 995.6 79.77 -05 80.01 -08 4.179 0.615 5.42
40 992.2 65.31 -05 65.80 -08 4.179 0.629 4.34
50 988.0 54.71 -05 55.37 -08 4.181 0.640 3.57
60 983.2 46.68 -05 47.48 -08 4.185. 0.651 3.00
70 977.7 40.44 -05 41.36 -08 4.190 0.659 2.57
80 971.8 35.49 -05 36.52 -08 4.197 0.667 2.23
90 965.3 31.50 -05 32.63 -08 4.205 0.673 1.97
100 958.3 28.22 -05 29.45 -08 4.216 0.677 1.76
140 926.1 19.61 -05 21.17 -08 4.285 0.685 1.23
180 886.9 14.94 -05 16.85 -08 4.408 0.674 0.98
220 840.3 12.10 -05 14.40 -08 4.613 0.648 0.86
260 784.0 10.15 -05 12.95 -08 4.983 0.606 0.83
Table A-9 Properties of Saturated Liquid Oxygen
T,K p, kg/m' u, Pa . S v, m2/s Cp' k]l(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
56 1,299 58.5 -05 45.0 -08 1.664 0.191 5.10
62 1,273 47.5 -05 37.3 -08 1.664 0.186 4.25
68 1,246 38.8 -05 31.1 -08 1.666 0.179 3.61
76 1,209 30.0 -05 24.8 -08 1.672 0.170 2.95
82 1,181 24.9 -05 21.1 -08 1.679 0.162 2.58
90.2 1,141 19.6 -05 17.2 -08 1.696 0.151 2.20
100 1,091 15.1 -05 13.8 -08 1.732 0.138 1.90
112 1,024 11.4 -05 11.1 -08 1.814 0.122 1.70
126 933 87.1 -06 93.4 -09 2.029 0.102 1.73
138 833 72.3 -06 86.8 -09 2.537 0.0838 2.19
150 675 53.7 -06 79.6 -09 5.598 0.0724 4.15
Table A-10 Properties of Saturated Liquid Parahydrogen
T,K p, kg/m' u, Pa : S v, m2/s Cp' kJl(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
14 76.9 24.8 -06 32.2 -08 6.47 0.0746 2.15
16 75.1 19.4 -06 25.8 -08 7.36 0.0889 1.61
18 73.2 15.9 -06 21.7 -08 8.42 0.0954 1.40
20.3 70.8 13.2 -06 18.6 -08 9.66 0.0989 1.29
22 68.7 11.6 -06 16.9 -08 10.82 0.1010 1.24
24 66.0 10.1 -06 15.3 -08 12.!j2 0.1008 1.25
26 62.8 88.0 -07 14.0 -08 14.80 0.0984 1.32
28 59.0 76.2 -07 12.9 -08 18.48 0.0938 1.50
30 53.9 64.6 -07 12.0 -08 26.59 0.0866 1.98
32 46.0 51.3 -07 11.2 -08 65.37 0.0915 3.67

Appendix A Material Properties 287
Table A-11 Properties of JP-4 Fuel
T,OC p, kg/m' u, Pa : s v, mils Cp
, k]/(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
-15 802 15.3 -04 19.1 -07 1.858 14.1 -02 20
0 789 11.2 -04 14.2 -07 1.926 14.0 -02 15
15 776 86.8 -05 11.2 -07 1.995 13.8 -02 13
30 763 70.1 -05 91.9 -08 2.063 13.7 -02 11
45 750 58.6 -05 78.2 -08 2.132 13.6 -02 9
60 737 50.4 -05 68.4 -08 2.201 13.5 -02 8
75 724 44.4 -05 61.3 -08 2.269 13.3 -02 8
Table A-12 Properties of Hydraulic Fluid (MIL-H-5606, P = 101.325 kPa)
T,OC p, kg/m' u, Pa : s v, mils Cp,k]/(kg' K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
-15 879 70.6 -03 80.3 -06 1.737 12.7 -02 962
0 868 34.2 -03 39.4 -06 1.788 12.6 -02 483
15 858 19.2 -03 22.4 -06 1.845 12.4 -02 286
30 847 12.2 -03 14.4 -06 1.905 12.1 -02 192
45 836 84.4 -04 10.1 -06 1.969 11.7 -02 143
60 826 63.0 -04 76.3 -07 2.035 11.2 -02 114
75 815 49.9 -04 61.2 -07 2.101 10.8 -02 97
Table A-13 Properties of Engine Oil (Unused)
T,OC p, kg/m' u, Pa . s v, mils Cp,kJ/(kg . K) k, W/(m' K) Pr
0 898 38.3 -01 42.7 -04 1.788 14.7 -02 46540
15 889 10.6 -01 12.0 -04 1.845 14.5 -02 13530
30 881 36.9 -02 41.9 -05 1.905 14.3 -02 4912
45 872 15.3 -02 17.5 -05 1.969 14.1 -02 2130
60 863 73.2 -03 84.8 -06 2.035 14.0 -02 1065
75 855 39.4 -03 46.1 -06 2.101 13.8 -02 598
100 840 17.2 -03 20.5 -06 2.214 13.6 -02 280
125 826 91.5 -04 11.1 -06 2.328 13.4 -02 159
150 811 56.4 -04 69.5 -07 2.440 13.2 -02 104

288 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table A-14 Properties of Mercury, Sodium, 22 Percent Sodium/78 Percent
Potassium and Potassium
T, ·C 0 50 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Density, kg/m'
Hg 13,600 13,460 13,350 13,110 12,880
Na 927 905 882 858 834 809 783
NaK 847 823 799 775 751 727 703
K 819 795 771 747 723 701 676
Viscosity, mPa . s
Hg 16.8 13.9 12.1 10.1 8.62
Na 7.05 4.50 3,45 2.84 2.43 2.10 1.86
NaK 5.29 3.54 2.76 2.29 1.95 1.68 1.46
K 4.63 2.98 2.27 1.90 1.69 1.45 1.34
Specific heat, kJ/(kg . K)
Hg 0.140 0.140 0.140 0.136 0.135
Na 1.384 1.339 1.305 1.280 1.264 1.255 1.255
NaK 0.941 0.908 0.887 0.879 0.874 0.874 0.883
K 0.812 0.791 0.774 0.766 0.761 0.766 0.774
Thermal conductivity, W/(m . K)
Hg 8.2 9.3 10,4 12.4 14.0
Na 81.5 75.7 71.2 66.8 62.7 59.0
NaK 24.7 25.9 26.2 26.2 25.9 25.5
K 44.1 42.0 39,4 37.2 34.9 32.5
Prandtl number
Hg 0.029 0.021 0.016 0.0011 0.0083
Na 0.0074 0.0059 0.0051 0.0046 0.0042 0.0039
NaK 0.013 0.0095 0.0077 0.0065 0.0057 0.0051
K 0.0053 0.0042 0.0037 0.0035 0.0032 0.0036

Appendix A Material Properties 289
Table A-15 Units Conversion Table
To obtain
or
Physical quantity Multiply by to convert Multiply by To obtain
Area
ft' 0.092903 m' 10.764 ft'
Density
lbm/ft' 16.018 kg/m' 0.062428 Ibm/ft'
Energy
Btu (IT) 1055.1 j 9.4782 E - 04 Btu (IT)
Btu 1054.4 j 9.4845 E - 04 Btu
cal (IT) 4.1868 ] 0.23885 cal (IT)
cal 4.184 j 0.23901 cal
Energy flux
Btu/(h . ft') 3.1525 W/m' 0.31721 Btu/(h • ft')
call(s . em') 4.184 E + 04 W/m' 2.3901 E - 05 cal/(s . em')
Force
k8r 9.80665 N 0.10197 k8r
lb, 4.4482 N 0.22481 lbf
Heat-transfer coefficient
Btu/(h . ft' . OF) 5.6745 W/(m" K) 0.17623 Btu/(h . ft' . OF)
call(s . em' . 0c) 4.184E+04 W/(m" K) 2.3901 E - 05 cal/(s . em' . 0c)
Length
ft 0.3048 m 3.2808 ft
in 0.0254 m 39.370 in
mi(US) 1609.3 m 6.2137 E - 04 mi(US)
Mass
Ibm 0.45359 kg 2.2046 lb.
slug 14.594 kg 0.068522 slug
Power
Btu/h 0.29288 W 3.4144 Btu/h
calls 4.184 W 0.23901 calls
hp (550 ft . Ibfls) 745.70 W 1.3410 E - 03 hp
Pressure
atm 101.325 Pa 9.8692 E-06 atm
Ibflin' 6894.8 Pa 1.4504 E- 04 lbf/in'
Specific heat
Btuy'(Ib., . e F) 4.184 kj/(kg' K) 0.23901 Btu/(lb.' OF)
cal/(g' "C) 4.184 k]/(kg' K) 0.23901 cal/(g' "C)
Temperature (see below)
Thermal conductivity
Btu . in/(h . ft, . OF) 0.14413 W/(m'K) 6.9381 Btu' in/(h . ft . OF)
Btu/(h . ft . OF) 1.7296 W/(m'K) 0.57818 Btu/(h . ft . OF)
cal/(s . em . 0c) 418.4 W/(m'K) 2.3901 E - 03 cal/(s . em . 0c)
Velocity
ft/s 0.3048 m/s 3.2808 ft/s
Viscosity
centipoise 0.001 Pa r s 1000 centipoise
Ib./(h . ft) 4.1338 E - 04 Pa's 2419.1 lbm/(h' ft)
lbm/(s . ft) 1.4882 Pa . s 0.67197 Ibm/(s . ft)
lbf' sift' 47.880 Pa r s 0.020885 Ibf' sift'

290 Compact Heat Exchangers
Table A-15 Units ConversionTable (continued)
To obtain
or
Physical quantity Multiply by to convert
Viscosity. kinematic
centistoke 1.0000 E - 06 m"/s
ft"/s 0.092903 m"/s
Volume
ft' 0.028317 m'
gal (US liquid) 3.7854 E - 03 m'
Volume flow rate
ft'lmin 4.7195E-04 m'ls
gal (US Iiquid)/min 6.3090 E - 05 m'ls
Temperature
T(K) = T(°C) + 273.15
T(K) = T("R)j1.8
T(K) = [T(" F)+ 459.67]/1.8
T("e) = [T("F) - 32]/1.8
Multiply by
1.0000 E + 06
10.764
35.315
264.17
2118.9
15.850
To obtain
centistoke
ft"/s
ft'
gal (US liquid)
ft'lmin
gal (US Iiquid)/min

Fig. A-1 Thermal conductivity of some metals.
Appendix A Material Properties 291
40D
300
200
100
80
60
50
L.L.
°
40
30
20
10
8
6
5
4
PURE SILVER
_PURE COPPER ---_._- f---------
I
PURE ALUMINUM
.........--DURAL
MAGNESIUM
/
7'-- /" BRASS 70-30
/ MOLYBDENUM
/ -r---
~N e--
.....-
0.01 CARBON STEEL V
----------... -
»> ~-
-
.e: STAINLESS STEEL
-/
./
500
-400
-·300
200
150
120
100
80
70 Q
60 E
50
40
30
20
15
12
10
8
- 300 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500
I I I
l, OF
I I
-250 0 250 500 750 1,000 1,200
l,oC

292 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. A-2 Transport properties of air at 1 atm.
0.9
0.8
0.7
Pr 0.6
Cp
1.2
1.1
1.0
O.S
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
o
AIR
1 ATMOSPHERE
V
l---I.---'
-
.... Pr - .>
--
--
V
-"V--;;, Ibs/(hr ft) t---
./
V
.....V -
T T I-- f-- cp,Btu/(lbOF)
=r:=.+- I---
1/ ~I.--'
I.---' k, Btu/Ihr ft 2°F/ft)-I---
V
J..--
o 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000
0.24
0.22
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12 IJ
0.10
0.08 -
0.06
0.04
0.02
o
Fig. A-3 Transport properties of oxygen gas at 1 atm.
0.04
0.2 0.02
0.3 0.03
0.1 0.01
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
Pr
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.10
0.06
IJ
0.05
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.01
o
-200 o 200 400 600 800 1,000
OXYGEN GAS
1 ATMOSPHER E
V
V
V
v
""-
r-- Pr - l- I/17
I---l--
./~Ibs/(hr ftJ I---
V V
I-. 1/
-
f-- Cp, Btu/<lboFJ "'7 V
/ :..---'
/ /
v
k, Btu/(hr ft 2°F/ftJ -
/
./
o o
Cp

Appendix A Material Properties 293
Fig. A-4 Transport properties of nitrogen gas at 1 atm.
0.12
1.0 0.10
0.8 0.08
Pr /10
0.6 0.06
0.4 0.04
0.2 0.02
NITROGEN GAS
1 ATMOSPHERE
V
V
V￾I.---
I-/10, lbs/thr I~ V
V- i.-- V- ./
r--.t-- I~ +- Pr V
V- L> l..- i- t--
/
----
V
./V ./V
,/ ./ Cp , Btu/Obs"F)-l￾V ./V
V V
V k, Btu/(hr It 2 "F/It) - I￾I~ V
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03 0.3
Cp
0.02 0.2
0.01 0.1
o o
o 500 1,000 1,500
o
2,000
o
Fig. A-5 Transport properties of hydrogen gas at 1 atm.
0.8
Pr
0.7
0.6
0.4
Cp
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
3.0
2.0
4.0
1.0
o
o 500 1,000 1,500 2,000
HYDROGEN GAS
1 ATMOSPHERE
V-i.-- .-
j...-
-I-- :.-l-I-
./V
Pr - l- V
V
V
V
I-I-/10, Ibs/Ihr It>.,...V￾V
L> Cp, Btu/Ob"F) l-I￾V
j.-- V
V V I--I--1-
./ i.--
./
./
...-j.--i.----
V l.-- I..- k, Btu/Ihr It' "F/lt) I--f-
/ V
.......-
1/ V
V
V￾o
0.01
0.03
0.06
0.02
0.05
0.04

294 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. A-6 Transport properties of helium gas at 1 atm.
2.0
1.5
c p
1.0
j.l
0.5
0
0.25
0.15
6.20
0.10
0.30
0.05
o
o 500 1,000 1,500 2,000
HELIUM GAS
1 ATMOSPHERE
t It' °F/ft) --
I--
.-1/" --
<,
........ t--- -
- Pr V
v -
--
./
vi-"'" cp , Btu/<IbOF) - - ,./-- --
f￾V
V f..--i---
V -----
f..--,l:ibS/(hr Itl-f￾V
V
--- o
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
Pr
t, OF
Fig. A-7 Transport properties of carbon dioxide gas at 1 atm.
0.02 0.2
0.03 0.3
CAR BON DIOXIDE GAS
1 ATMOSPHERE .-V
,......---
I-f- j.l, Ibs/(hr It),......---
--
V
»:
,......- -- V
:.,..--
"-
...... t----
- Pr V
---
./
./V V
./
-:
~,.?
....... c p, Btu/(lboFJ - --
L-? ./
-/ V
/
.//k, Btu/{hr ft' of/ft) - f-..
/'./ 0.01 0.1
Cp
o
0.04
0.05
o
1,000 1,500 2,000
t, OF
o 500
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
o
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Pr j.l
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Appendix A Material Properties 295
01
03
02
.08
.05
.04
.06
.07
STEAM
/
/ K1,000 psi -
\ (( /10, Ibs/(hr ft) f-----
/
V\ /f/ 14.7 psi
/
/ I
1,000 psi
-- Pr ; \
14.7P/
\ -. / V/
1--hi \ -:>
V
:--
/ 1,000 psi V \ .:
1/ I
k, Btu/Ihr ft X
2
'F/ft)--
/
V 1,000 psi
V
-<,-I-- Cp, Btu/(lb'F) --r--
./
14.7 psi
1/
..- -
0.3
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
Pr
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
Cp
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
Fig. A-8 Transport properties of steam at 1 atm and at 1000 psi.
2.0
a 400 600 800 1,000
a
1,200

296 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. A-9 Transport properties of saturated liquid water.
5.0
0.3 3.0
LIQUID WATER
SATURATED
cp, Btu/OboFl __ l.----"'"
\ \
Btu/Ch,It2
oflIt)
\ .> -r----
-t\ P, Ibs)lt 3
--.. <,
\\ -r---r--
\ r---
,\
"''''
<,
~-
- 11-, Ibs/Ch, Itl
0.4 4.0
14
1.10 12
1.00 10
Cp
0.90 8
6
P Pr
4
2
0
20
40
80
60
o
100 200 300 400 500 600
o
o
2.0
1.0
o
0.1
0.2
Fig. A-10 Transport properties of liquid oxygen.
6.0
5.0
4.0
Pr
II￾3.0
2.0
1.0
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
LIQUID
OXYGEN
I"'"....- k, It2
e Flit)
\ -,
100 ATM
.......111\ -.
\' ............ -. __ P, Ibs/lt3
\
............ SlAT.
1\ Vr--- rz
\
-, 1'\
\
"-
___ Cp, I
,I I J J
I
BOILING POINT
o 0
-400 -350 -300 -250 -200 -150
t, OF
50
40
30
20
10
60
80
0.10 100
0.12
.080
P
0.6 .060
0.5 .05
0.4 .040
Cp
0.3 .03
0.2 .020
0.1 .01
0 0

Appendix A Material Properties 297
Fig. A-11 Transport properties of liquid hydrogen.
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
6 0.06
5 0.05
P I'
4 0.04
3 0.03
cp
2 0.02
0.01
LIQUID
HYDROGEN
\
-
i\ k, Btu/thr ft 2
'F/lt)
)(:'
X( \- f----- Cp, B;U/(lb'FJ
- r
--+- f~ "/ p, Ibs/ft3
1', Ibs/(hr ft)
/ \
SAT.-
---;rOlliNJ POINT
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
Pr
o o
-440 -430 -420 -410 -400 -390
Fig. A-12 Transport properties of JP-4 fuel.
0.08 8.0
0.09 9.0
0.10 10.0
0.07 7.0 p
Pr
20
30
10
40
60
50
cp
0.5
0.4
0.6
FUEL
JP-4
- o, Ibs/ft3 - ---
\
__ k, Btu/thr ft2 'F/ft)
--
-----
I--
---
~p, Btu/(Ib'FJ-r-
---
_1',lbs/hrft-.....:::::...::f---
1.0
2.0
4.0
3.0
5.0
0.06 6.0
o
-50 o 50 100 150 200
l, <JF

298 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. A-13 Transport properties of hydraulic fluid MIL-H-5606.
HYDRAULIC
FLUID
MIL-H-5606
I.- p,lbs/ft'-
\
- ----
--- 1------- -- c p , Btu/<lb'Fl
\ -\-----I--
\ \ r----'--
\ \ -
k, Btu/Ihr ft2'F/ftl----
\
\
1\ \
\
,,-!r I--
-.
<,1'--
-p., Ibs/<hrft>---
60
1,000 50
900
0.6
0.5 .10
.09
0.4 .08
Cp .07 p.
0.3 .06
k
.05
0.2 .04
.03
0.1 .02
.01
0 0
500
400
300
200
100
o
-50 o 50 100
t, OF
150 200
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
o
250
Pr
40
p
Fig. A-14 Transport properties of a typical aircraft engine oil.
p
40
60
50
Pr
2,500
2,000
3,000
1,000
500
1,500
o
150 200 250 300
t, OF
50 100
AIRCRAFT
ENGINE -
OIL
p, Ibs/ft 3
__
--- - -
--- r- c--- p, Btu/Ob'Fl
--- e:
--- k, Btu/Ihr ft2
'F/fll
\
\\
\\
~Pr- I--
- u, Ibs/<hr
I
o
o
200
300
100
500
600
400
700
0.6
0.5 .10
.09
0.4 .08
Cp .07 p.
0.3 .06
k
.05
0.2 .04
.03
0.1 .02
.01
0 0

Appendix A Material Properties 299
Fig. A-15 Transport properties of liquid mercury.
o
4
3
2
o
Cp
02
03
.04
01
o
200 400 600 800 1.000
MERCURY f----- LIQUID
I\--Pr
\
\
"\ ~Ibs/f~'
"-\ --d. Btu/Ihr ft2
of1ft)
I-, "- ./
<,V
Cpo B)"/(lbOF) I---- - . / 1"-
V <; ~,Ibs/(hr ft)----
<;r--
0.005
0.035
0.010
0.030
0.020
0.025
0.015
900 10
9
800 8
7 Pr
600 6
P 5
k
400 4
3
200 2
0 0
Fig. A-16 Transport properties of liquid sodium.
0.10 10
0.40 40
50
60
.012
.010
.008 Pr
0.6 .006
0.4 .004
0.2 .002
1.2
I'
1.0
0.8
1.4 .014
1.8
1.6
SODIUM
LIQUID
r--- _ P. Ibs/ft'
-.:.:.---
'<, -- 1\ --- - k, Btu/Ihr ft2 °F/ft)
\ --+-- ,-.l- _ Cpo Btu/(lbOF)
'\ <,
-, <,
<,
r-, f'--........1'.lbs/(hr ftl--
Pr -=;:-r----1-,--
20
30
P
0.30
0.20
Cp
o o
200 400 600 800
o
1.000 1.200 1.400
o

300 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fig. A-17 Transport properties of liquid potassium.
o
200 800 1,000 1,200 lAOO
t, OF
0.1
o
POTASSIUM
LIQUID
:!---0+-I-- k, Btu/(h, ft2
°F/ft)
\
...............t-=- p, Ibs/ft 3
\ ----===t::::-
\
--- cp, Btu/(lbOF) -- -, -, --- -, <,
<, <; 1', lbs/Ihr ft) ---+-
Pr"----l- --I---I--
0.4
0.3
0.2
p 0.9
50 1.0
40 0.8
0.7
I'
30 0.6
0.5
60 1.2
1.1
400 600
5
25
20
10
30
15
0.30
.010 0.25
.008 0.20
Cp
.006 0.15
Pr
.004 0.10
.002 0.05
0 0
Fig. A-18 Humidity correction factors for density and
specific heat. P= Xd..,P. cp = Xc,.,cp
• (Same
graph applies for SI dimensions.)
1.06
105
........-
104
Xc... f'( .-/ 103
----
........-
102
........-
lOt
.€'V
NI .02 .0 04 05 06
10.99 t-- W,lbs H:Pllb.dry air
P98 -r--f--. I
Xd.. t:-lr- pg7 -t- P96

Appendix A Material Properties 30I
Fig. A-19 Combustion products correction factors for
specific heat. Cp= Xc.tcpa (5ame graph applies for 51
dimensions.)
110
109 L￾108
107 Xc, 1/
;/
1.06 .>
/'
105 "/C - 0.18("EROS::GASOLV
/' /'
104 K
/'V H/C 6 FUEL OILl
103 V
1.02
...V 101 f fuel/lb.oir 00 .01 02 o ."4 ".~ os
Fig. A-20 Combustion products correction factors for
density. P= Xd.tPa (Same graph applies for 51
dimensions.)
L.--
I04·-+-+--'I--l--+-+-+-~c_+__+-+_..,
1003,_X.:Jd'L--..L_L--l--I_L--+-_I---c..l-""'I'---+----.,
HIC - FUEL OIc':!-L.--V
I~
.999 <,
998 ...........
997 1/
996 H/C -0.18 6
-I IGAS~NEI
95-l-I-l--+-l--+-I-+--+-~k-+---J

Appendix B Examples of Heat
Exchanger Performance Calculations
The purpose ofthis appendix is to illustrate the use ofthe basic heat transfer and
friction data presented in Chaps. 6, 7, and 10, together with the heat exchanger
and flow-friction theory outlined in Chap. 2. The four exchanger applications
considered are an intercooler for a gas-turbine plant and three types of gas-tur￾bine regenerators.
Gas-turbine heat exchangers have been chosen for illustrative purposes be￾cause they provide good examples of gas-to-gas and gas-to-liquid heat ex￾changers where compactness is important and where much in the way of optimi￾zation can be accomplished if a detailed analysis ofthe exchanger performance is
undertaken.
It is important for the reader to realize that the examples analyzed here
represent only a partial treatment of the comprehensive design of a heat ex￾changer described in Chap. 2, Figure 2-12. This simplification is necessary in
order to illustrate clearly to the engineer who is not completely conversant with
heat exchanger design procedures the use of the contents of this publication.
The experienced designer will appreciate the restricted nature ofthe illustrative
problems and will note the omission of important considerations, such as
1. Thermodynamic basis for the selection of desired pressure drops
2. Optimum distribution ofthermal resistance and flow-friction power on the
two surfaces
3. Optimum design of extended surface, material thermal conductivity, and
thickness
4. Uncertainty of proper thermal contact between the extended and prime
surfaces
5. Allowance for fouling
6. Influence of poor flow distribution on exchanger performance
7. Plant machinery-arrangement factors, controlling in part the dimensions
of the exchanger
8. Thermal stress and construction problems

Appendix 8 Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 303
Any or all of these factors may have a pronounced influence on the selection of
the geometry of the particular surface to be used in the heat exchanger core
element. All these factors are bypassed by the arbitrary selection of surface
geometry for the illustrative problems considered here.
Sample solutions are presented for a direct-transfer-type intercooler and a
direct-transfer-type regenerator in complete form; for an indirect-transfer-type
regenerator in abbreviated form, showing only the application of the e-N,u
approach; and for a periodic-flow-type regenerator, incorporating a screen-ma￾trix surface, in complete form.
EXAMPLE 1 DIRECT-TRANSFER INTERCOOLER
Figure B-1 describes the core geometry of an intercooler for a 5,000-shp (3.7
MW) gas-turbine plant. Operating conditions and the heat transfer surface are
specified as follows:
Operating conditions, air side:
Air-flow rate, humid
Air humidity
Air entering temperature
Air entering pressure
Operating conditions, water side:
Water-flow rate
Water inlet temperature
Intercooler surface
200,000 Ib/h (25 kg/s)
0.015 Ibs H20/Ibm(0.015 kg/kg)
2600F = 720'R = 127'C = 400K
39.7 Ibf/in
2 abs (2.75 X 105 N/m2
)
400,000 Ibm/h (800 gal/min) (50 kg/s)
60'F (I5'C, 288K)
11.32-737-SR (finned flat tube, see Fig. 10-97)
The objective of this problem is to predict, for the specified conditions and
the basic heat transfer and flow-friction characteristics of the surface, (1) the
intercooler effectiveness and (2) the pressure drops for both water and air flows.
This prediction will be based on clean surfaces with no allowance for fouling.
The steps in the analysis require the determination, in the order given, of the
following factors:
1. Surface characteristics from Table 9-4c
2. Fluid properties from Figs. A-2 and A-9
3. Reynolds numbers
4. StPr2
/
3 and f from the basic characteristics of the surface
5. Heat-transfer coefficients
6. Fin effectiveness
7. Surface effectiveness
8. Overall coefficient of heat transfer
9. N,u and exchanger effectiveness
10. Outlet temperatures
11. Pressure drops
These steps are carried out in detail below.

304 Compact Heat Exchangers
Surface Characteristics from Table 9-4c
AIR SIDE
Flow-passage hydraulic radius, rh.a = 0.00288 ft (0.878) X (10-3 m)
Total air-side transfer area/total volume, aa = 270 ft2/ft3
(886 m2/m3
)
Fin area/total area = 0.845
Free-flow area/frontal area a; = 0.780
Fin-metal thickness 0= 0.004 in. = 0.00033 ft (0.10 X 10-3 m)
Fin material, aluminum with k = 100 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F/ft)[173 W/(m . K)]
Fin length (one-half distance between tubes) 1= 0.225 in (5.71'
10-3 m)(Fig. 10-97)
WATER SIDE
The tubes have straight sides with semicircular ends.
Outside dimensions per tube = 0.737 in by 0.10 in (18.7 X 10-3 m by
2.54 X 10-3 m)
Inside dimensions per tube = 0.717 in by 0.08 in (18.2 X 10-3 m by
2.04 X 10-3 m)
Fig. B-1 A direct-transfer intercooler for a 5.000-shp (3.7-MW)
gas-turbine plant.
AIR
5'4" (1.625ml

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 305
Frontal area associated with one tube = 0.434 in2
(2.8 X 10-4 m2
) (see
dimensions in Fig. 10-97)
Free-flow area of one tube = 0.0560 in2
(0.361 X 10-4 m2
)
Inside periphery of one tube = 1.524 in (38.7 X 10-3 m)
Free-flow/frontal area (Jw = 0.129
Water-side transfer area/total volume CXw = 42.1 ft2/ft3
(138 m2/m3
)
Water-side flow-passage hydraulic radius, rh.w = 3.06 X 10-3
ft
(0.933 X 10-3 m)
CORE DIMENSIONS (from Fig. B-1):
Air-side frontal area, Afr = 10.67. ft2
(0.991 m2
)
Water-side frontal area, Afr,w = 3.17 ft2
(0.294 m2
)
Total heat exchanger volume V = 16.9 ft3
(0.479 m'')
Fluid Properties
Assume, as a first approximation, an outlet air temperature of 75°F (24°C) =
535°R (297K), and an outlet water temperature of 80°F (27°C). These approxi￾mations must be verified later.
Fig. B-2 Temperature conditionsin an intercooler.
260°F (400K)
180°F I
(297K) 75°F _ _ I
80°F (300K)
(2BBKl60°F T 1 I -
tcoolins water
Inorder to evaluate gas viscosity for the Re parameter, cp
for St, and Pr, a bulk
average air temperature needs to be estimated (see Chap. 4). From the sketch of
temperature conditions (drawn as for true counterflow, although the actual
exchanger has a crossflow arrangement), Fig. B-2, it is evident that average
temperatures are
ta =70 + = 137°F (58°C)(331K)
t w =700F (21 °C)(294K)
From Fig. A-2 (or more accurately from tables in the literature) for dry air,
fJ. = 0.0482 Ibm/(h . ft)(1.99 X 10-5 Pa . s)
Pr =0.700
cp = 0.240 Btutlb.; . °F)[1.0 kJ/(kg . K)]
To COITect Cp
for a humidity of 0.015 Ibm/lb, from Fig. A-18,
Xc
•w = 1.0126
and cp = 1.0126 X 0.240 = 0.244 Btu/Obm • °F)[1.02 kJ/(kg . K)]

306 Compact Heat Exchangers
Assuming a 1 percent pressure drop (to be verified later), the outlet air pressure
is 39.3 Ibfjin
2 abs (2.71 X 105 Njm 2
) . The inlet and outlet air specific volumes
can then be evaluated, employing the perfect gas equation of state and the
correction for humidity. From Fig. A-18 the correction factor for humidity Xd,w
is 0.9915. It should be noted that this correction factor is applied to the density,
the reciprocal of the specific volume.
V
j
= = _1_ RTj = 53.345 X 720 = 6.78 ft3jlbm (0.423 m3jkg)
pj Xd,w MPj 0.9915 X 39.7 X 144
= = 53.345 X 535 = 5.19 ft3jlb (0.324 m3jk )
V2 P2 0.9915 X 39.3 X 144 m g
For this application the specific volume does not vary linearly with transfer area,
and Vm from Eq. (2-27a), when evaluated as an arithmetic average of Vj and V2, is
not a good approximation. A better approximation results from the use of a
log-mean absolute temperature [Eq. (2-29)] as already evaluated in the previous
calculation, ta
(log-mean average) = 137°F (59°C). Thus
Tlma = 137 + 460 = 597°R (332K)
Then from Eq. (2-27b),
V m =.!i Tlma = 39.7 X 597 = 0.833
Vj Pay t, 39.5 X 720
This is 6 percent lower than the arithmetic average of V j and V2' Average water
properties from Fig. A-9 are
k = 0.347 Btuj(h . ft 2
• °Fjft)[0.6 Jj(m . s . k)]
11 = 2.36 Ibmj(h . ft)(0.976 X 10-3 N . sjm2
)
c = 1.00 Btuj(lb . °F)[4.18 kJj(kg' K)]
Pr =6.8
v = 0.01603 ft3jlb (p = 62.3 lb/It")(0.001 m3jkg)(p = 998 kgjm2
)
Reynolds Numbers
AIR SIDE
G = = A:'
a
= = 24,050 Ibmj(h . ft2)[32.62 kgj(s . m
2
)J
R = 4rhaG = 4 X 0.00288 X 24,050 = 5 760
e
a 11 0.0482 '

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 307
WATER SIDE
G = = 978,000 Ibm/(h . ft2)[1326 kg/(s . m3
) ]
[v = 4.4 ft/s(1.34 m/s)]
R = 4 X 0.00306 X 978,000 = 5 080
e
w 2.36 '
St and!
AIR SIDE
From Fig. 10-97 for surface 11.32-.737-SR with Rea = 5,760,
StPr2
/
3 = 0.0054
f= 0.021
0.0054
St = 0.788 = 0.00685
WATER SIDE
From Fig. 6-7 for turbulent flow inside of circular tubes, Re., = 5,080,
and Pr = 6.8,
Nu=55
As«J«; = 1, no correction need be made for viscosity variation with tempera￾ture. From Fig. 6-6,f= 0.0094. Note the use of circular-tube performance as an
approximation for the flat tubes considered here. High accuracy for the f and h
prediction is not important for the water side.
Heat Transfer Coefficients
AIR SIDE
h = StGep = 0.00685 X 24,050 X 0.244
= 40.2 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F)[228 W/(m2
• K)]
WATER SIDE
h=Nuk
4rh
h = 55 X 3.06 ~~7 3 X 4 = 1,560 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F)[8,852 W/(m2
• K)]

308 Compact Heat Exchangers
Fin Effectiveness (Air Side Only)
From Fig. 2-13, for
_ /2h _ 2 X 40.2 _ f -1 ( -1)
m - 'VkJ - 100 X 0.000333 - 49.2 t 161 m
and
ml = 49.2 X = 0.923
nr: 0.79
Overall Surface Effectiveness (Air Side Only)
From Eq. (2-3),
Af
110 = 1 - A (1 - l1f)
= 1 - (0.845)(1 - 0.79) = 0.823
Overall Coefficient of Heat Transfer U (Based on
Air-Side Area)
From Eq. (2-2), neglecting the very small wall resistance,
-.!...=_1_+ 1
Ua 110 ha (aw/aa)hw
1 1
0.823 X 40.2 + (42.1/270) X 1560 = 0.0343
Ua = 29.2 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F)[166 W/(m2
• K)J
This prediction is for a clean surface condition. A reasonable allowance for
fouling could be included at this point to give a somewhat lower magnitude for
Ua
• However, for the sake of clarity in this illustrative problem, and because of
the absence of service information on which to base a fouling factor, no such
consideration will be included here.
Ntu and Exchanger Effectiveness
Air-side capacity rate: Ca = 200,000 X 0.244
= 48,800 Btu/(h . °F)(25.7 kW/K)
Water-side capacity rate: Cw = 400,000 X 1.00
= 400,000 Btu/(h . °F)(211 kW/K)

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 309
From Eq. (2-7), the number of heat transfer units,
N = AaUa = 270 X 16.9 X 29.2 = 2 73
tu.max C rnin 48,800 .
From Fig. 2-16, for a crossflow exchanger with both fluids unmixed, and
Crnin/Crnax = 48,800/400,000 = 0.122, the intercooler effectiveness is,
e = 90 percent
Outlet Temperature
From Eq. (2-6),
C (t - t ) e= a h,ln h,out t
h
= t
Ca(th
•
in - t
e•in) , a
O - 260 - t
h•out
- 80° (7°C)( K) .90 - 260 _ 60 ' th,out - F 2 300
Then from energy-balance considerations the outlet water temperature may be
evaluated from
t w•out- tw •
in = (ta,in - ta,out) = 0.122 X 180 = 21.9°F (12.2°C, K)
w
tw,out = 81.9°F (33.8°C)(307K)
The assumed outlet temperature for the evaluation ofthe air properties was
75°F (297K). However, it is not necessary to go through the procedure again,
since the air properties will not be changed significantly from those used in the
calculations.
Pressure Drops
From Eq. (2-26), neglecting entrance and exit losses, which would be very small
for this type of surface and exchanger geometry,
~P = VI [(1 + a2) (V2 - 1) + (Vm ) ]
PI 2ge PI VI Ae VI
AIR SIDE
A L 19
- = - = 550,1 + a
2 = 1.61
Ae
Th 12 X 0.00288
~P _ (24,050)2 1 X 6.78 [ (5.19 _ 1) P; - 3,600 2 X 32.2 39.7 X 144 1.61 6.78
+ 0.021 X 550 X = 0.000825(-0.38 + 9.61)
= 0.0076 or 0.76 percent

310 Compact Heat Exchangers
WATER SIDE
A L 5.333
- = - = 3.06 X 10-3 = 1,740
v = const
and so,
G2 L
llP=-vf￾2gc
rh
= (978,000)2 1 X 001603 X 0.0094 X 1 740
3,600 2 X 32.2 . ,
= 300 Ibf
/ft2 = 2.1 Ibf/in
2 (14.5 X 103 N/m2)
These calculations illustrate the use of the basic data to determine the
characteristics of a given intercooler. The complete design problem, Fig. 2-12,
involves considerations of choice of optimum surface, coolant flow rate, dimen￾sions, exchanger effectiveness, and pressure drops, all of which are beyond the
scope of this presentation.
EXAMPLE 2 DIRECT-TRANSFER REGENERATOR
Figure B-3 describes the core geometry of a gas-turbine regenerator for a
5,000-shp (3.7 MW) open-cycle gas-turbine plant. Operating conditions and the
heat transfer surfaces are specified as follows:
Operating conditions:
Air-flow rate, humid
Air humidity
Fuel-air ratio
Fuel, fuel oil
Air side:
Louvered plate-fin surface
Entering pressure
Entering temperature
Gas side:
Plain plate-fin surface
Entering pressure
Entering temperature
193,000 Ibm/h (24.3 kg/s)
0.015 Ibm H20/Ibmdry air (kg/kg)
0.015 Ibm/Ibm (kg/kg)
H/G= 0.15 Ibm/Ibm(kg/kg)
i-6.06
1321bf/in
2
abs (9.1 X 105 N/m2
)
347°F = B07°R (175°C)(44BK)
11.1
14.9 Ibf
/in2
abs (103 X 103 N/m 2
)
B05°F = 1265°R (430°C)(703K)
The objective ofthis problem is to determine, for the specified conditions and
the basic heat transfer and flow-friction characteristics of the surface, (1) the
regenerator effectiveness and (2) the pressure drops for both the air and gas
sides.
The steps in the analysis require the determination of the following factors:
1. Surface characteristics, from Table 9-3
2. Heat transfer and free-flow areas
3. Fluid properties from Fig. A-2

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 311
Fig.B-3 Adirect-typegasturbineregeneratorfor a5,OOO-shp
(3.7-MW)open-cycle plant.
GAS
AIR
4. Reynolds numbers
5. StPr2
/
3
and f from the basic characteristics of the surface
6. Heat transfer coefficients
7. Fin effectiveness
8. Surface effectiveness
9. Overall coefficient of heat transfer
10. Ntu and exchanger effectiveness
11. Pressure drops
A detailed illustration of this procedure follows.
Surface Characteristics from Table 9-3a and b
Surface
Plate spacing b, in
Hydraulic radiusrh, ft
Fin thickness 15, in
Transfer area/volume
between plates p,
ft2/ft3
Fin or extended areal
total area
Air side
i-6.06
0.25 (6.35 X 10-3 m)
0.00365 (1.11 X 10-3 m)
0.006 (0.15 X 10-3 m)
0.640
Gas side
11.1
0.25 (6.35 X 10-3 m)
0.00253 (7.71 X 10-3 m)
0.006 (0.15 X 10-3 m)
0.756
The heat exchanger core dimensions are, from Fig. B-3,
Afr•• = 22.5 £12 (2.09 m2
) Afr•g = 45.0 ft2
(4.18 m2
)
V = 7.5 X 6 X 3 = 135 ft3
(3.82 m")
Assume a plate thickness between air and gas sides
a = 0.012 in (0.3 X 10-3 m)

312 Compact Heat Exchangers
and assume a fin material of high-temperature alloy steel with a thermal conduc￾tivity
k = 12 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F/ft)[20.8 W/(m . K)]
from Fig. A-I.
Heat Transfer and Free-Flow Areas from Chap. 2,
Eqs. (2-31)
AIR SIDE
_ 0.25 X 256 _ f 2/f 3 ( 2/ 3)
aa - 0.25 + 0.25 + 0.024 - 122 t t 400 m m
GAS SIDE
_ 0.25 X 367 _ 75 P/P (7 2/ 3)
ag - 0.25 X 0.25 X 0.024 - 1 t t 5 4 m m
The total heat transfer area on each side is given by
A=aV
Consequently,
Aa = 122 X 135 = 16,480 ft 2
(1,531 m2
)
Ag = 175 X 135 = 23,600 ft2
(2,193 m")
The ratio of free-flow area to frontal area is given by
Ac
a=- =arh Arr
aa = 122 X 0.00365 = 0.445
ag = 175 X 0.00253 = 0.443
The free-flow areas are then given by
Ac= aArr
Ac
•a = 0.445 X 22.5 = 10.0 ft2
(0.929 m2
)
Ac
•g = 0.443 X 45.0 = 19.9 ft2
(1.85 m2
)
Fluid Properties
Assume as a first approximation, to be verified later, a regenerator effectiveness
of 75 percent. This approximation need not be of a high order of accuracy, since

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 313
it is used only to estimate an average temperature for the evaluation of fluid
properties.
From the definition of effectiveness [Eq. (2-6)] for C, <: Ch and e=75 percent,
ta
•out =691°F = ll51 -n(366 °C)(639K)
tg
•ou t =461 'F = 921 -n(239°C)(512 K)
Thus the bulk average temperatures are
t
a
••
v = 691 ; 347 = 519°F (979°R)(271 0C)(544K)
t
g
.av = 805; 461 = 633°F (10930R)(33rC)(607K)
Arithmetic averages are satisfactory here because of the approximately linear
variations of the fluid temperatures with flow length. For air at these bulk
temperatures from Fig. A-2, or more accurately from available tables.
fJ, Ibm/(h . ft)
Pr
Pr 2
/
3
cp
' Btu/(lbm • OF) for
dry air
Air side
0.069 (2.85 X 10-5 Pa . s)
0.67
0.766
0.248 [1.04 kJ/(kg . K))
Gas side
0.073 (3.02 X 10-5 Pa . s)
0.67
0.766
0.251 [1.05 kJ/(kg . K)J
The specific heat on the air side, as given above, should be corrected for
humidity, and the specific heat on the gas side, as given above, should be
corrected for both the humidity and the effects of combustion of the fuel. From
Figs. A-18 and A-19 for a humidity of 0.015 Ibm H20/Ibm(kg/kg) dry air and a
fuel-air ratio of 0.015 Ibm/Ibm, (kg/kg)
Then
Cp
•a = Xc.wep = 0.251 Btu/tlb., . OF), (1.05 kJ/kg . K)
cp
•g = Xc.wXc'/cp = 0.259 Btu/(lbm. °F)[1.08 kJ/(kg . K)]
Assume as a first approximation a 2 percent pressure drop on both the air and
gas sides. The air outlet pressure is then 1291bf/in
2
(8.89 X 105 N/m 2
) and the
gas outlet pressure is 14.6Ibf/in
2
(1.01 X 105 N/m 3
) . The inlet and outlet air and
gas specific volumes can then be evaluated from the perfect gas equation of
state, employing the correction factors for humidity and the effect of the fuel.
From Figs. A-18 and A-20,
Xd
•w = 0.992

314 Compact Heat Exchangers
It should he noted that these correction factors apply to the density P, the
reciprocal of the specific volume v.
The specific volumes are computed as follows:
AIR SIDE
_ 1 _ (RjM)Ta
•1
V a•I--- X P
Pa.1 d.ca a.1
53.345 X 807 _ 2 28 f 3jlh (0 142 3jk)
0.992 X 132 X 144 -. t m' m g
_ 1 _ 53.345 X 1,151 _ t: 3jlh ( 3jk )
V a.2 - Pa.2 - 0.992 X 129 X 144 - 3.33 It m 0.208 m g
As a fair approximation, the mean specific volume will he evaluated as the
arithmetic average of the inlet and outlet specific volumes
Va
.m = v
a.
2
; V a.
2 = 2.28 ; 3.33 = 2.80 ft3jlhm (0.175 m3jkg)
GAS SIDE
1 RTg.ljM 53.345 X 1,265
v =-= =
g.I Pg.I Xd.wXd,jPg.I 0.992 X 1.001 X 14.9 X 144
=31.7 ft3jlhm(l.98 m3jkg)
_ 1 _ 53.345 X 921 _ f 3jlh ( 3jk )
V g,2 - P
g
,2 - 0.992 X 1.001 X 14.6 X 144 - 23,6 t m 1.47 m g
v
g
•
m
= Vg.I ; V
g.2 = 31.7; 23.6 = 27.65 ft3jlhm (1.73 m3jkg)
Reynolds Numbers
AIR SIDE
Ga = = = 19,300 lhmj(h . ft2
)[26,18 kgj(s . m2
) )
R = 4rh.aGa = 4 X 0.00365 X 19,300 = 4 090
e
a u; 0.069 '
GAS SIDE
Wg = (1 +f)Wa = 1.015 X 193,000 = 196,000 lbmjh (24.7 kgjs)
- Wg
_ 196,000 _ lb j(h f 2) k j 2) Gg - A
c
•
g
- 19.9 - 9,850 m • t [13.36 g (s . m )
Re = 4rh.gGg = 4 X 0.00253 X 9,850 = 1 370
e /1g 0.073 '

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 315
StPr2
/
3 and f
AIR SIDE (from Fig. 10-38)
StPr2
/
3 = 0.0073 f= 0.0375
St = 0.00954
GAS SIDE (from Fig. 10-26)
StPr2
/
3 = 0.0045 f= 0.0155
St = 0.00588
Heat Transfer Coefficients
AIR SIDE
ha = StGep = 0.00954 X 19,300 X 0.251
= 46.1 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F)[262 W/(m2
• K)]
GAS SIDE
hg = 0.00588 X 9,850 X 0.259 = 15.0 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F)[85 W/(m2
• K)]
Fin Effectiveness (Fig. 2-13 or Eq. (2-4))
AIR SIDE
I 2X46.1
m = 'V 12 X 0.006/12
= 124 ft-I
(407 m")
1=%= = 0.0104 ft (0.0032 m)
ml = 1.29 then 11f,a = 0.665
GAS SIDE
_ 2 X 15.0 _ f -1 ( -I)
m - 12 X 0.006/12 - 70.6 t 231 m
ml = 0.733 then 11f,g = 0.850
Surface Effectiveness from Eq, (2-3)
110 = 1 - A (1 - 111)

316 Compact Heat Exchangers
AIR SIDE
110,. = 1 - (0.640)(1- 0.665) = 0.786
GAS SIDE
110.g= 1 - (0.756) (1 - 0.850) = 0.887
Overall Coefficient of Heat Transfer U
From Eq. (2-2), neglecting the very small wall resistance,
2..=_1_+ 1
V. 110,ah. (Ag/Aa)110,ghg
1 + 1
0.786 X 46.1 (23,000/16,480) X 0.887 X 15.0
= 0.276 + 0.0525 = 0.0801
(34.5%) (65.5%)
Va= 12.5 Btu/(h . ft2
• °F)[70.9 W/(m2
• K)]
N« and Exchanger Effectiveness
AIR-SIDE CAPACITY RATE
G. = Wac".a = (193,000)(0.251) = 48,500 Btu/(h . °F)(25.5 kW/K)
GAS-SIDE CAPACITY RATE
Gg = (196,000)(0.259) = 50,800 Btu/(h . °F)(26.7 kW/K)
CAPACITY-RATE RATIO
Gmin = 48,000 = 0.955
Gmax 50,800
From Eq. (2-7), the number of heat transfer units,
N = A.Va = 16,480 X 12.5 = 4 25
tu.mex Gmin 48,500 .
From Fig. 2-16 for a crossflow exchanger with both fluids unmixed, the effec￾tiveness e = 0.75. The gas and air outlet temperatures can then be computed
from the definition of effectiveness as
t.,out = 691°F (366°C)(639K) tg,out = 477°F (247°C)(520K)
Pressure Drops
The complete equation for the pressure drop [Eq. (2-26)] is given as follows:

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 317
The approximate entrance and exit loss coefficients are given in Fig. 5-4 as
Air side
Gas side
From previous calculations,
AIR SIDE
0.48
0.54
= (L) = 1,648
Ac a Th a
= = 1,190
Ac g Th g
0.24
0.28
tlP _ (19,300)2( 1 )( 2.28 )[( 2) p; - 3,600 2 X 32.2 132 X 144 0.48 + 1 - 0.445
+ 2(3.33 _ 1) + (0 0375 X 1 648 X 2.805) 2.28 . , 2.28
- (1 - 0.4455
- 0.24) ~:~]
= 5.37 X 10-5
(1.28 + 0.92 + 76.1 - 0.82)
= 4.16 X 10-3 = 0.42 percent
GAS SIDE
tlP _ (9,850)2( 1 )( 31.7 )[( 2) p; - 3,600 2 X 32.2 14.9 X 144 0.54 + 1 - 0.443
+ 2(23.6 _ 1) + (0 0155 Xl 190 X 27.65) 31.7 . , 31.7
2 23.6] - (1 - 0.443 - 0.28) 31.7
= 1.72 X 10-3
(1.34 - 0.51 + 16.1 - 0.39)
= 0.0285 = 2.9 percent
These calculations illustrate a procedure for predicting the performance of a
given heat exchanger core. No allowance has been made for additional heat
= 5.37 X 10-5
(1.28 +
= 5.37 X 10-5
(1.28 +
= 5.37 X 10-5
(1.28 +
= 5.37 X 10-5
(1.28 +
= 5.37 X 10-5
(1.28 +
= 5.37 X 10-5
(1.28 +

318 Compact Heat Exchangers
transfer resistance due to fouling or to increased pressure drop due to header
design and poor flow distribution. The choice of surfaces and core dimensions
does not necessarily represent an optimum design. An optimum-design regener￾ator (see Fig. 2-12) would have more nearly equalized percent pressure drops,
but design considerations such as these are beyond the scope of this presenta￾tion. It should also be noted that the low fin effectiveness on the air side (0.665)
may introduce some error into the calculations, since there is question as to the
accuracy of application of the fin analysis for fin effectiveness less than about
0.80 for flow in long finned passages.
EXAMPLE 3 LIQUID-COUPLED INDIRECT￾TRANSFER REGENERATOR
In this illustration, detailed calculations will not be presented for the air-side and
gas-side exchangers, as these calculations are essentially the same as for the
direct transfer-type exchangers previously considered. Emphasis in this section
will be on the application of the
m.( c, Ca )
G = '.JI Ga , Gg , C
g
' C
L
relationships [Eq. (2-20)].
Consider the liquid-coupled indirect-transfer regenerator system pictured in
Fig. B-4. Cycle conditions (same as for the previously considered direct-transfer
regenerator) are given at the top of page 319.
Fig. 8-4 A liquid-coupled indirect-transfer regenerator for a 5,000-shp (3.7-MW) turbine plant.
41N (0. 10m)

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 319
Shaft power
Air-How rate
Fuel-air ratio
Air side entering:
Pressure
Temperature
Gas side entering:
Pressure
Temperature
5,000 hp (3.7 MW)
193,000 Ib/h (24.3 kg/s)
0.015 Ib/lb (kg/kg)
132 Ibf
/in2
abs (9.1 X 105 N/m2
)
347°F (807°R)(175°C){448K)
14.9Ibf/in
2
abs (1.03 X 105 N/m2
)
805°F (1265°F){430°C){703K)
The surfaces employed in each of the two exchangers and their geometrical
factors are as follows, from Table 9-4c:
Surface
Type
Fins per inch
rh, ftf
IJ, ft2/ft2
f
a, ft2/ft3
aliquid,ide, ft2/ft3
Fin/total area, ft2
/ft 2
Fin thickness IJ, in
Wall thickness a
Specific weight
(for steel), Ibm/ft3
Material k,
Btu/{h . ft2
• F/ft)
Air-side unit
11.32-0.737-SR (Fig. 10-97)
Finned-Hat tube
11.32 (446 per m)
2.68 X 10-3
(8.17 X 10-4 m)
0.727
270 (886 m2/m3
)
42 (138 m2/m3
)
0.845
0.010 (3.5 X 10-4 m)
0.010 (2.5 X 10-4 m)
63.9 (1024 kg/m")
12 [21 W/{m . k)]
Gas-side unit
9.1-0.737-5 (Fig. 10-94)
Finned-flat tube
9.1 (358 per m)
3.25 X 10-3
(9.9 X 10-4
rn)
0.745
224 (735 m2/m3
)
42 (138 m2/m3
)
0.813
0.010 (2.15 X 10-4 m)
0.010 (2.15 X 10-4 m)
54.6 (875 kg/m")
12 [21 W/(m . k)]
f Corrected from Table 9-4c magnitudes to allow for greater fin metal thickness.
The calculated results needed for the determination of the component effec￾tivenesses for the air-side and gas-side units, ea
and eg
, respectively are summar￾ized in the following tabulation:
G, Ibm/{h . ft2
)
Re
St
f
h, Btu/{h . ft2 • OF)
110
U, Btu/(h . ft2
• OF)
n;
tiP/PI, %
Air side
21,430 [29 kg/(s . m2
) ]
3,000
0.0085
0.026
45.5 [258 W/(m2
• K)J
0.60
25.5 [145 W/{m2
• K)]
7.60
0.40
Gas side
7,300 [9.9 kg/{s . m2)J
1,300
0.0117
0.031
21.4 [121 W/{m2
• K)]
0.745
15.42 [87.5 W/{m2
• K)J
7.60
2.4
For the four-pass arrangements pictured in Fig. B-4, the Nt u per pass is
7.60/4 = 1.90 for both sides. Figure 2-16 for crossflow (unmixed), with Cmin /
Cm ax "" 1, then yields epa = epg = 0.60. Equation (2-18) may now be employed to

320 Compact Heat Exchangers
get the component effectiveness (for CL = Ca
, CL = Cg
)
nep 4 X 0.60
ea , eg = 1 + (n - l)e
p
1 + 3 X 0.60 = 0.858
Then, from Eq. (2-20), the overall effectiveness becomes
1
1.165 + 1.165 - 1 = 0.75
EXAMPLE 4 THE PERIODIC-FLOW REGENERATOR
The analysis for performance of this type of regenerator is in some measure
more simple than for the direct type or liquid-coupled indirect-transfer type.
The same surface configuration is exposed to the air and gas flows, and no
effectiveness of extended surface considerations are involved. The resulting
simplifications will be evident from the following example.
Figure B-5 describes the core geometry for a stainless steel screen-matrix
regenerator for a 1,000-shp (0.75-MW) open-cycle gas-turbine plant.
Fig. B-5 A rotating periodic-flow regenerator for a 1,000-shp (0.75-MW) gas-turbine
plant.
---,
\
ROTATING MATRIX, AXIAL SEALS
FRONTAL-AREA RATIO Afrg/Afr. = 2.5
Afrg= 26.6 ft 2(2.47m21. A'r. = 10.65 ft2(0.989 m2)
SURFACE: SCREEN MATRIX 24 X 24 - 0.014
ROTATIVE SPEED = 26.5 r/min (0.442 rls)
MATRIX MASS = 3511b (159kg)
Cycle operating conditions are as follows:
Air-flow rate (dry) 75,400 lbm/h (9.5 kg/s)
Air humidity Essentially zero
Fuel-air ratio 0.Ql5Ibm/lb (kg/kg)
Fuel oil utc 0.15
Regenerator air side:
Inlet pressure 47.7 Ibf/in
2 abs (3.29 X 10 5 N/m 2
)
1.1651.165 + 1.165 + 1.165
10.65 ft2(0.989 m2) 10.65 ft2(0.989 m2)

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 321
333°F (793°R)(168°C)(44IK)
6.15 ft3/lbm (0.384 m3/kg)
Inlet temperature
Inlet specific volume
Regenerator gas side:
Inlet pressure 15.2 Ibf/in
2 abs (1.05 X 105 N/m2
)
Inlet temperature 1,246°F (I,706°R)(675°C)(948K)
Inlet specific volume 41.5 ft3/lb
m (2.59 m3/kg)
Rotor speed 26.5 r/min (0.442 r/s)
The steps in the analysis require the determination of the following fac￾tors:
1. Surface characteristics and then the heat transfer and free-flow areas from
the given core geometry
2. Fluid properties
3. Reynolds numbers
4. St and!
5. Heat transfer coefficients and Nlu's
6. Exchanger effectiveness
7. Pressure drops
Surface Characteristics and Core Geometry
The details of the screen-matrix heat transfer surface are as follows:
Mesh per inch
VVire diameter, in
Thickness of one screen 6, in
Porosity, p
Stainless steel:
Specific heat
Density
24 by 24t (945 by 955 per m)
0.0135 (3.4 X 10-4 m)
0.0255 (6.9 X 10-4 m)
0.725
c, = 0.12 Btu/Ob m • °F)[0.5 kJ/(kg' K)]
P. = 4881bm/ft
3 (7,817 kg/m3)
980 (3,215 m2/m3)
0.740 X 10-3 (2.26 X 10-4 m)
From this description, the following may be calculated:
Heat transfer area per unit volume
o, ft2/ft3, from wire diameter
and mesh
Hydraulic radius rh, ft, from Eq.
(2-31h)
The flow frontal areas are
f 2 ( 2) A f 2 ( 2) A
fr.g
A = 2.50 fr.g = 26.6 t 2.47 m, fr.a = 10.65 t 0.989 m ,
Afr,a
and the heat transfer areas are
Ag + Aa = ex X vol = 980 X 37.3 X = 2,560 ft2
(238 m2
)
A A ...J.= fr,g = 2.50
Aa Afr,a
Aa = 730 ft 2
(67.8 m2 Aa = 730 ft )
2
(67.8 m2
)

322 Compact Heat Exchangers
The "effective" free-flow areas are
Ac= pArr
Ac
•g = 19.3 ft 2
(1.79 m2
) Ac
•a = 7.71 ft2
(0.716 m2
)
Ag Aa L
Then -=-=-=94.7
Ac•g Ac•a rh
For round wire the ratio ofsolid volume to surface area is diameter/4. Thus the
solid volume is 2,560 X (0.0135)/(4 X 12) = 0.720 ft3
(0.0204 m"). The matrix
mass is then 0.720 X 488 = 351 Ibm(159 kg). This result can also be calculated
using the core volume [2.61 ft3
(0.0739 m3
) ) and the matrix solidity (1 - P=
0.275), together with the material density [Ps = 488 Ibm/ft3
(7,817 kg/m3
) ) .
Fluid Properties
For this purpose, bulk average flow temperatures are required, and this in turn
requires a preliminary estimate of exchanger effectiveness. This estimate can be
quite approximate; e = 85 percent will be used.
Air side
ta
•
in = 333'F (793'R)(166'C)(441 K)
ta,on. = 1,108'F (1,568'R)(598'C)(871 K)
i.; = 720'F (l,180'R)(383 'C)(656 K)
PI = 47.7Ibf/in
2
abs (3.29 X 105 N/m 2
)
P2 = 46.7Ibf/in
2 abs (3,22 X 105 N/m3
)
(assumed liP = 1 Ibf/in
2
)
(6.9 X 103 N/m 2
)
VI = 6.5 ft3/lb
m(0.41 m3/kg)
v2 = 12.41 ft3/lb
m(0.77) m3/kg)
V m = 9.27 ft3/lb
m(0,58 m3/kg)
J.l = 0.077 Ibm/(h . ft)t
(3.18 X 10-5 Pa . s)
Pr = 0.67f
cp
= 0.254 Btu/(lbm. 'F)t
(1.06 kJ/kg . K)
Gas side
tg
•
ln = 1,246'F (1,706'R)(675'C)(948 K)
tg
•on• = 471 'F (931 'R)(244 'C)(517 K)
tav = 858'F (1,318'R)(459'C)(732 K)
PI = 15.2 Ibf/in
2
abs (1.05 X 105 N/m2
)
P2 = 14.7Ibf/in
2 abs (1.01 X 105 N/m2
)
(assumed liP = 0.5 Ibf/in2
)
(3.5 X 103 N/m 2
)
VI = 41.5 ft3/lb
m(2.59 m3/kg)
v2 = 23.4 ft3/lb
m(1.46 m3/kg)
vm = 32.6 ft3/lb
m (2.04 m3/kg)
J.l = 0.084Ibm/(h . ft)t
(3.47 X 10-5Pa . s)
Pr = 0.66f
cp = 0.263 Btu/(lbm. 'FH
[1.10 kJ/(kg . K)]
f For dry air from Fig. A-2 or, more accurately, from available tables. *Includes fuel correction factor of 1.02 from Fig. A-19.
Reynolds Numbers
This calculation first requires the determination of mass velocities from C =
W/A c
:
75,400
Ca = 7':7'l = 9,780 lbm/(h . ft2
)[13.26 kg/(m2
• s))
c, = = 3,960 lbm/(h . ft 2)[5.371 kg/(m2 • s))

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 323
Note that
Ga= Afr.g/Afr.a
Gg 1 + fuel-air ratio
Then from Re = 4rhG//l,
Re = 4 X 0.740 X 10-3 X 9,780 _
a 0.077 - 376
Re = 4 X 0.740 X 10-3 X 3,960 _
g 0.084 - 140
St and!
From Figs. 7-8 and 7-9,
Air side Gas side
Re 376 140
StPr2
/
3
0.057 0.088
St 0.0744 0.116
f 0.46 0.64
Ntu's and Heat Transfer Coefficients
For this type of exchanger,
and h = StGep
St
A/Ae
n;
G, Ibm/(h . ft2
)
Cp
' Btu/(lb m • OF)
h. Btu/(h . ft 2
• °F)t
Air side
0.0744
94.7
7.04
9,780113.26 kg/(m 2
• s)]
0.254 [1.06 kJ/(kg . K)J
185 [1,050 W/(m2
• K)
Gas side
0.116
94.7
10.98
3,960 [5,371 kg/(m2
• s)]
0.263 (1.10 kJ/(kg . K)]
121 [687 W/(m 2
• K)
t Note these remarkably high coefficients relative to those associated with conven￾tional surfaces.
Exchanger Effectiveness
Here the theory presented in Chap. 2 will be employed. In Figs. 2-31 to 2-38,
e = (1) ( »c..
From the cycle conditions,
Co = 75,400 X 0.254 19,150
Cg
75,400 X 1.015 X 0.263 = 20,200 = 0.950

324 Compact Heat Exchangers
The matrix capacity rate can be calculated from
C; = (r/min X 60) X mass of matrix X c.
= 26.5 X 60 X 351 X 0.12 = 66,900 Btu/(h . °F)(35.27 kW/K)
Then
Cr = 66,900 = 3 49
C, 19,150 .
The overall number of transfer units from Eq. (2-23) is
N,"" [(U)" (U)J
1 1
1 c.tc, 1 0.95 = 4.38
-+-- --+--
Ntu•a «: 7.04 10.98
The effectivenesses may be determined from Fig. 2-32:
e = 0.82
Pressure Drops
This calculation is based on Eq. (2-26), with the porosity p in place of the
flow-area contraction ratio,
Air side Gas side
PI' Ibj /ft2 6,880 (3.29 X 105 N/rn 2
) 2,190 (1.05 X 105 N/rn 2
)
VI,ft 3
/lbm 6.5 (0.41 rn3/kg) 41.5 (2.59 rn3/kg)
V2, ft3
/lbm 12.41 (0.77 rn3/kg) 23.4 (1.46 rn3/kg)
Vm, ft3
/lbm 9.27 (0.58 rn3/kg) 3.26 (2.04 rn3/kg)
vdvi 2.02 0.564
vm/vi 1.51 0.785
p, ft3/ft3 0.725 0.725
A/Ac
(= L/rh) 94.7 94.7 f 0.46 0.64
G Ibm/(h . ft 2
) 9,780 [13.26 kg/(rn 2
• s)] 3,960 [5.37 kg/(m2
• s))
(1 + p2) - 1) 1.56 -0.665
f(:J(~ )
65.7 47.6
~.£!. 1.026 X 10-4 3.55 X 10-4
2gc PI
dP/PI 0.691 X 10-2 1.67 X 10-2
(dP/PI),o,." % 2.36
1 c.tc, 1 0.95 = 4.38
-+-- --+--
Ntu• «: 7.04 10.98
1 c.tc, 1 0.95 = 4.38
-+-- --+--
Ntu• «: 7.04 10.98

Appendix B Examples of Heat Exchanger Performance Calculations 325
In summary, the exchanger effectiveness is 82 percent and the total pressure
drop is 2.4 percent. It is essential to realize, however, that such important
factors as duct losses, flow turning losses, carryover, and leakage have been
omitted from this analysis. They will obviously depend upon the details of the
final configuration.

Appendix C
Relations
Derivation of 8-Ntu
In Chap. 2, exchanger heat transfer performance theory was summarized. The
purpose of this appendix is to present some of the derivations for the e-Ntu
relations in order to illustrate the general method of approach. These deriva￾tions will be limited to the direct-transfer counterflow, multipass overall-coun￾terflow, and crossflow one-fluid-mixed cases, Eqs. (2-13), (2-18), (2-15), and
(2-16). The derivations for the e-Ntu relations for the other flow arrangements
given in Chap. 2 are referenced there.
COUNTERFLOW EXCHANGER
Temperature conditions in a counterflow exchanger with Ch<C, (that is, Ch =
Croin) may be described schematically, as shown in Fig. C-l. From an energy-bal￾ance consideration,
(C-l)
It is thus evident that a plot of the "operating-line," t h versus to' will have a slope
Fig. C-1 Temperature conditions for counterflow with Ch < Ce
•
SECTION
1
I 1
--JI
~dA
AREA
t e, in
SECTION
2
C Ch<C, Ch<C, h<C,

Appendix C Derivation of e·N,. Relations 327
Fig.C-2 Operating-line andequilibrium-line representation for counterflow
and c,< Ce
.
L. l1 .1
I I
I 0' 1 a1 I
EQUILIBRIUM-LINE, SLOPE =1
OPERATING-LINE, SLOPE =c.tc; =mo
tc , in
dt; C,
m =-=-=const
o dt; Ch
for the situation of both Cc and Ch constant. Moreover, the slope mo
is greater
than unity for the assumed condition of Ch < Cc
' This operating line is plotted in
Fig. C-2. Also shown is a line specifying the conditions for thermal equilibrium
between the two streams:
t h = t; for equilibrium
From the geometry of the figure, it is evident that the vertical or horizontal
intercept between these two lines, from a given operating point (th
, tc)' must be
equal to (th
- tJ, as shown on the previous figure of temperature conditions
versus area.
From the definition of e [Eq. (2-6), Chap. 2), since Ch = Cmin ,
t - t e = h,in h,out
t h.in - t c,in
(C-2)
where b and are defined on the operating-line-equilibrium-line plot.
In addition to the energy balance [Eq, (C-l)), a rate equation may be written
for the heat transfer rate dq through the differential area dA [see Eq, (2-l)):
From Eq, (C-l),
dq = U(t h
- tJdA (C-3) t - t e = h,in h,out
t - t e = h,in h,out t - t e = h,in h,out
t - t e = h,in h,out

(C-4)
(C-4a)
328 Compact Heat Exchangers
and this result, combined with Eq. (C-3), yields
d(th - t e) = _ (1 _Ch ).!:!- dA
th
- t
e C, Ch
This expression may be readily integrated from the hot-fluid inlet to the outlet
section to yield
t - t a h.2 e.2 = --.! = e-N.. (l-C./C,)
th•l
- te
•l a l
Inspection of the geometry of the operating-line-equilibrium-line plot will
demonstrate that
th
•2
- te
•2 = a2 = - 0
s
th 1 - t.; 1 = al = - 0' = - -
• •
Thus
th•2 - te•2 = a2 = 1 -
th•
l
- te
•
l
a l 1 -
where
(C-5)
Then, introducing Eq. (C-2),
a2 = 1 - e
al 1-(Ch/Ce)e
This result may be combined with Eq. (C-4a) and then rearranged to yield
1 -
e =
1 - (Cmin/Cmax)e N'u(l
where, for this derivation, Cmin = Ch and C max = Ce
• However, one can demon￾strate that for C; = Cmin , the resulting equation for e is identical to Eq. (C-5),
providing only that the defining equation for e [Eq. (2-6), Chap. 2] is properly
used. Thus Eq. (2-13) of Chap. 2 has been derived.
MULTIPASS OVERALL-COUNTERFLOWEXCHANGER
In the previous demonstration the operating-line-equilibrium-line representa￾tion was useful in showing the needed algebraic relations in terms of simple
geometrical relations. Nevertheless, one could have derived Eq. (C-5) with
about the same ease without this representation. In the derivation ofEq. (2-18)
of Chap. 2, the operating-line-equilibrium-line approach becomes of real
value. Consider the three-pass (n = 3) overall-counterflow exchanger with Ch =
Cmin shown in Fig. C-3. Any flow configuration may be employed in any pass,
providing only that each pass has the same effectiveness ep
:
(C-6)

Appendix C Derivation of e-N,u Relations 329
Fig. C-3 Three-pass overall-counterflow exchanger.
2
I
4
I
I
I
I r : t e • in
1
I 3 I
I
I
I teo out
.lo..
........ I I "r='" t h , on I
I
I
I
I
I
J l
I
J
t h, out I
I
Fig. C-4 Operating-line and equilibrium-line representation for a multiplass counterflow
exchanger; Ch = Cm in , C; = Cm
ax '
o t e, in
r oolmo B,
0
0
I EQUILIBRIUM-LINE
OVERALL-OPERATING-L1NE
SLOPE mO=CCICh
( > 1)
:a.
I
I
The operating-line-equilibrium-line representation is pictured in Fig. C-4. A
broken line is used to represent the overall operating line, because the operating
conditions within a pass are not necessarily those for true counterflow. Only the
inlet, the outlet, and the between-pass states are assumed to correspond to
counterflow conditions.
It is evident from the representation that
e=~ (C-7)
Now, as

330 Compact Heat Exchangers
a4 = j.o - Jo 1 - e
a1 j.o - Jo/m o 1 - elmo
1 - a4/a1
e =
1 - (1/mo)(a4/a1)
(C-8)
It remains to express «J«, = <I> (e p
, mo), and this can be achieved as follows: It is
evident that e1-2bears the same relation to J2 and J2 +a2as ebears to Jo and j.o =
Jo + a4' Consequently, from Eq. (C-8), we may write immediately,
1 - a2/a1
Similarly, for e2
- 3 and e3
- 4
,
e2-3 = 1 - (1/mo)(a3/a2)
1 - a4/a3
e3-4 = 1 - (1/m o)(a4/a3)
From Eq. (C-6) and the above, it is clear that
a2 = a3 = a4 = 1 - e"
a1 a2 a3 1 - e,,/m o
(C-9)
It follows that
(C-10) a4 a4 a3 a2 ( 1 - e" )3
= a3 a2 a1 = 1 - e,,/m o
This result, substituted into Eq. (C-8), yields, with some rearrangement
e = [(1 - e,,/mo)/(l - ep)j3 - 1
[(1 - e,,/mo)/(l - e,,)]3 - l/mo
(C-ll)
A generalization of this three-pass exchanger result for n passes, and for the
case of either Ch = Cmin or C; = Cmin, leads to Eq. (2-18) of Chap. 2.
Note that this equation becomes indeterminate for the case of Cmin/Cmax = 1.
Application of L'Hospital's rule will lead to Eq. (2-18a), however, or a direct
development can be made from a suitable operating-line - equilibrium-line rep￾resentation.
CROSSFLOW, ONE FLUID "MIXED"
This flow arrangement and the idealized temperature conditions are pictured
schematically in Fig. C-5.
Uniform flow distribution for the cold stream will be specified, so that with
respect to the frontal area Arr>
ac, c, (C ) -=-=const -12 dArr Arr
1 - a2/a1 1 - a2/a1 1 - a2/a1
1 - a2/a1 1 - a2/a1 a2/a1

Appendix C Derivation of e-Ntu Relations 331
Fig. C-5 Temperature conditions for crossflow, one fluid mixed, one unmixed; Cmlxed (= Ch
) <
Cunmixed (= Cc) .
Ch (Mixed Flow)
-+
~--t-
" -+ i--+
2. -+
cJ ----
t
t
I'" I
V3t
c, out
I I
t , In : _ _ _ _ _ _ I
. I
I I
o
COLD FLUID FLOW LENGTH
Moreover, a uniform distribution ofthe heat transfer area A will be assumed, so
that
dA A
-=- (C-13)
ac, c,
In both cases dCcis the differential capacity rate ofthe cold fluid associated with
the cold-fluid frontal area dArr and the heat transfer surface dA.
Inspection ofthe figure for temperature conditions as a function of cold-fluid
flow length suggests that a condenser type of effectiveness expression is applica￾ble [see Eq. (2-13a) or (2-14a), Chap. 2].
Then, defining T as
one may write
r = 1 - e-(UdA/dC,)
and, by Eq. (C-13),
I' = 1 - e-A U/
Cc = const (C-14)
An energy balance for the hot fluid flowing over the heat transfer area associated
with dArrresults in
r = 1 - e-(UdA/dC,)
= 1 - e-(UdA/dC,)

332 Compact Heat Exchangers
Equation (C-14) may be employed to get another expression for dq, namely,
dq = r(th - tc,in)dCc
Combination of the two dq expressions and separation of variables lead to
dt h = _ F dCc = _ F Cc dArr
th- tc,in Ch Ch Afr
where Cc, Ch
, and Afrare the total magnitudes and are not variables. Integration
then yields
t - t
h,out c,in = e-r(c,/c.)
t h•ln - tc,in
(C-15)
Since for the case at hand Ch = C mln' it follows from the defining equation for e
[Eq. (2-6)] that
t - t e = h,in h,out
t h,ln - t c,in
Then from Eq. (C-15),
(C-16)
This expression corresponds to Eq. (2-15) with
Cc = C mu = Cunmlxed and Ch = Cmin = Cmixed
and I" from Eq. (C-14) becomes
With a specification of Ch = C mu = Cmlxed, one can start with Eq. (C-15) and the
appropriate definition of e,
and arrive at Eq. (2-16).
t h,ln - tth,ln - c,in t c,in
t h,ln - t c,in
t h,ln - t c,in
t h,ln - tth,ln - c,in t c,in t h,ln - t c,in
t h,ln - t c,in

Index
Abrupt contraction and expansion coeffi￾cients (see Pressure-loss coeffi￾cients, abrupt contraction and
expansion)
Arbitrary or periodic input, transient re￾sponse of heat exchangers to, 88
Capacitance, wall and rotor, 31, 79, 85
Capacity rate:
definition of, 14
matrix, 31
Carryover loss, 31
Circular tubes, 120, 124-126, 133, 134,
136-139, 143
transition region data for, 141, 143
Coefficients, abrupt contraction and ex￾pansion (see Pressure-loss coeffi￾cients, abrupt contraction and
expansion)
Compact heat transfer surfaces, 2
Conductance, overall, 14, 15
Conduction, longitudinal, 33-35
Counterflow-type heat exchangers, 19-
20,50,63,326
with crossflow headers, 23, 53-54, 67
Cross-rod matrices, 184, 274-276
Crossflow-type heat exchangers:
both fluids mixed, 21, 52, 65
both fluids unmixed, 20, 51, 64
one fluid mixed, the other unmixed,
20-21,52,64,330
Design, definition of, 45
Design methodology, 12-13, 40
Direct-transfer-type heat exchangers, 11,
14
transient response in, 85-86
Dwell-time ratio, 85
Effectiveness:
of derivations, 326-332
of equations, 19-23
exchanger, 16,62-75
fin, 16,62
overall surface, 15
Entry-length solutions, 133-139
Exchanger variables, 14-24
Experimental accuracy, 153-155, 188
Fin effectiveness, 16, 62
Finned circular-tube surfaces, 263-270
Finned flat-tube surfaces, 271-273
Flow acceleration, 36
Flow arrangement, effect of, 24, 70
Flow distribution, 41-43
Flow-rate change, transient response of
heat exchangers to, 87-88
Fluid properties, 280-301
in English units, 292-300
51 units, 282-288
in unit conversions, 289-290
(See also Temperature-dependent fluid
properties, effects of)
Free-flow area, minimum, 8
Friction factor:
apparent mean, 118
in circular tubes, 120, 138, 143
in concentric-circular-tube annuli, 122
333

334 Index
Friction factor (Cour.):
core, 36, 109-110
definition of; 8-9
in rectangular tubes, 120, 121, 144-146
in triangular tubes, 120, 151
in tube banks, 147
Friction-power expenditure, 4
and heat exchanger design, 1-2
Geometry, surface and core, 43-45
Glass ceramic matrix, 185, 188, 278, 279
Header configurations, 77-78
Header design, 41-43
Heat exchangers:
counterflow-type, 19-20, 50, 63, 326
with crossflow headers, 23, 53-54,
67
crossflow-type: both fluids mixed, 21,
52, 65
both fluids unmixed, 20, 51, 64
one fluid mixed, the other unmixed,
20-21,52,64,330
direct-transfer-type, 11, 44
transient response in, 85-86
liquid-coupled indirect-transfer-type,
11-12, 27-29
longitudinal conduction in, 33-35, 76
multipass-type, 21-24, 65, 66, 328
parallel-counterflow-type, 23, 55, 68
parallel-flow-type, 20, 51, 63
periodic-flow-type, 12, 29-33, 57-62,
72-75
transient response in, 86-87
split-flow-type, 24, 55, 70
Heat flux ratio, effect of, 116
Heat transfer and friction power charac￾teristics, comparison of, 4-5
High-performance surfaces, 5
Hydraulic diameter, 8
Hydraulic radius, 8
Influence coefficients, asymmetric heat￾ing, 116, 123, 128, 131, 132, 135
Interrupted surfaces, 2
Liquid-coupled indirect-transfer-type
heat exchangers, 11-12, 27-29
Log-mean rate equation, 24-27
Longitudinal conduction, 33-35
Longitudinal thermal conductivity, 76
Louvered plate-fin surfaces, 234-241
Mass velocity, 8
Matrix capacity rate, 31
Matrix speed, 32-33
Matrix surfaces, 142
crossed-rod matrices, 184, 274-276
glass ceramic, 185, 188, 278, 279
plate-fin, 185, 277
screen matrices, 148-149, 185
sphere matrices, 150
triangular tube matrices, 151
Methodology, 12-13,40
Momentum-flux correction factor, 118
Multipass-type heat exchangers, 21-24,
65,66,328
Noise, 187, 188
Nusselt numbers:
combined thermal and hydrodynamic
entry length, laminar flow, cir￾cular tube, 138, 139
fully developed profiles, laminar flow,
annulus, 123
circular tube, 120
rectangular and triangular tube, 120,
121
turbulent flow annulus, 129-132
circular tube, 125, 126
flat duct, 127, 128
thermal entry length, laminar flow, an￾nulus,135
circular tube, 133
flat duct, 134
rectangular tube, 136
turbulent flow, circular tube, 136,
137
Operating and equilibrium lines, 22,
327, 329
Overall conductance, 14, 15
Parallel-counterflow-type heat exchang￾ers, 23, 55, 68

Rectangular tubes, 120, 121, 136
Relations, surface and core, 44
Reynolds number, 6, 8, 186
Index 335
Surface selection, 39-41
Temperature, log-mean, 24, 38
Temperature-dependent fluid properties,
effects of, 102-107
flow direction property variation, 106
gas-property variations, 102-104
liquid-property variations, 105-106
Test procedures, 152-155
experimental uncertainty in, 153-155
steam-to-air tests, 152-154
transient tests, 154-155
Thermal circuit, 15
Thermal conductivity:
longitudinal, 76
of metals, 291
Thermal-entry-length solutions, 133-139
Transfer units, exchanger, 16
modified, 31
Transient response of heat exchangers,
79-89
to arbitrary or periodic input, 88
to flow-rate change, 87-88
to inlet temperature changes, in direct￾transfer-type exchangers, 85-86
in periodic-flow-type exchangers, 86-
87
solutions, 90-101
summary of solutions, 82-83
Transient test procedures, 154-155
Triangular tube matrices, 151
Tube banks, 146, 147, 215-222
effect of number of rows, 147
Turbulence promoters, 5
Uncertainty, experimental, 153-155, 188
Unit conversions, 289-290
Velocity, core, 38
Wavy-fin plate-fin surfaces, 256-257
Whistling, 187, 188
Wire screen matrices, 148-149, 185
Parallel-flow-type heat exchangers, 20,
51,63
Perforated-fin plate-fin surfaces, 262
Periodic-flow-type heat exchangers, 12,
29-33,57-62,72-75
transient response in, 86-87
Peripheral heat-flux variation, 120
Pin-fin plate-fin surfaces, 258-262
Plain plate-fin surfaces, 223-234
Plate-fin matrix, 185, 277
Porosity, 8, 43-45
Prandtl number, effect of, 7-8
Pressure drop, core, 35-38
Pressure-loss coefficients, abrupt contrac￾tion and expansion, 108-114
core friction factor, 36, 109-110
entrance pressure drop, 36, 108-110
exit pressure rise, 36, 108-110
for multiple-circular-tube heat ex￾changer core, III
for multiple-square-tube heat exchang￾er core, 113
for multiple-triangular-tube heat ex￾changer core, 114
for multiple-tube flat-duct heat ex￾changer core, 112
Properties, fluid (see Fluid properties)
Screen matrices, 148-149, 185
Seals, rotating, 33
Sizing a heat exchanger, 45-48
Specific volume, mean, 37
Sphere matrices, 150
Split-flow-type heat exchangers, 24, 55-
56, 70
Stanton number, 8, 17
friction factor and, 77
Steam-to-air test procedures, 152-154
Strip-fin plate-fin surfaces, 242-256
Surface and core geometry, 43-45