Numerical investigation of flow and heat transfer in a volumetric solar
receiver
Th. Fend, P. Schwarzbözl, O. Smirnova*, D. Schöllgen, C. Jakob
German Aerospace Center, Institute of Solar Research, DLR, 51147 Koeln, Linder Hoehe, Germany
article info
Article history:
Received 30 October 2012
Accepted 6 June 2013
Available online 4 July 2013
Keywords:
Volumetric solar receiver
Volumetric heat transfer coefficient
Solar tower technology
abstract
Volumetric solar receivers are used in solar power plants to convert concentrated solar radiation into
high temperature heat to operate a thermal engine. In general, porous high temperature materials are
used for this purpose. Since the pore geometry is important for the efficiency performance of the
receiver, current R&D activities focus on the optimization of this quantity. In this study, the influence of
slight geometry changes of this component on its temperature distribution and efficiency has been
investigated with the objective of an overall improvement. A numerical analysis of the mass and heat
transfer through the receiver has been performed. The investigated receiver was an extruded honeycomb
structure made out of Silicon Carbide. Additionally, experimental tests have been performed. In these
tests, selected receiver samples have been exposed to concentrated radiation. From these tests solar-to￾thermal efficiency data have been derived, which could be compared with the calculated data. Two
numerical models have been developed. One makes use of the real geometry of the channel (single
channel model), the other one considers the receiver to be “porous continuum”, which is described by
homogenized properties such as permeability and effective heat conductivity. The experimental pa￾rameters such as the average solar heat flux and the mass flow were taken into account in the models as
boundary conditions. Various quantities such as the average air outlet temperatures, the temperature
distributions and the solar-to-thermal efficiency were used for the comparison. The correspondence
between the experimental and numerical results of both numerical models confirms the capability of the
approaches for further studies.
 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The volumetric solar receiver is one of the key components of
solar tower technology, which uses concentrated solar radiation to
generate thermal energy to operate a thermal engine. The concen￾trated radiation is generated by a large field of individually moving
mirrors (heliostats). The focus is located on top of a tower (Fig.1, left).
The receiver, located in the focus, generally consists of a porous
material, which absorbs the radiation and transfers it into heat of an
air flow. After that, the air is used to generate heat in a boiler.
A reliable, continuous and predictable operation of the solar
receiver is of great importance. It has been investigated already
since 1985. From this time, numerous studies have been published
[1e4]. A comprehensive review is given in Ref. [5]. The material
investigated is an improved Silicon Carbide honeycomb structure
based on the state-of-the-art-technology shown in Fig. 1 (middle
and right), which has also been applied in the solar tower in Jülich
[6]. It has been manufactured by St. Gobain IndustrieKeramik
Rödental.
In the current study, the performance of one single receiver
module has been investigated experimentally and numerically. The
numerical work was carried out using two different models of the
volumetric solar receiver. The first of them, the so called “single
channel model” describes air flow and heat transfer in a selected
volume in detail and the second one (“continuum model”) de￾scribes air flow and heat transfer in the whole volume of the
module treating the absorber as a porous medium described by
effective properties.
In the numerical work presented, the influence of geometrical
variations on the overall performance of the receiver was investi￾gated with the objective to further increase the efficiency of this
component. The geometry of the receiver modules can be seen in
Fig. 1. They consist of a honeycomb-like ceramic structure made out
of channels and walls named “absorber”: This absorber is embedded
in a ceramic containment, the so-called “cup”. Two geometrical
* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ49 2203 601 2901.
E-mail addresses: olena.smirnova.@dlr.de, smirnoffa2003@inbox.ru
(O. Smirnova).
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Renewable Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/renene
0960-1481/$ e see front matter  2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.06.001
Renewable Energy 60 (2013) 655e661
variations have been chosen for the investigations in this study. The
first one considers two different channel diameter/wall thickness
dimensions and the second one considers the overall shape of the
absorber.
2. Methodology
2.1. Experimental set-up
To investigate performance characteristics of the receiver, a
tubular experimental set-up was used, which was able to supply
boundary conditions similar to the application in the power plant
for one 140*140 mm receiver module. Fig. 2 shows a photograph of
the whole set-up, Fig. 3 shows the flow scheme. The receiver cup is
plugged into a high temperature steel tube, which was insulated
with high-temperature-materials based on ceramic fibers. The
concentrated radiation of up to 900 kW/m2 is provided by 10 Xenon
short-arc lamps with ellipsoid reflectors. As ellipses have two foci,
the short arc lamps are located in the first focus as emitters, the
sample is located in the second focus. The distance between the
lamps and the sample is approximately 150 cm.
The concentrated radiation meets the inlet surface of the
receiver sample and heats it up. The blower supplies the pressure
difference and causes an air flow through the sample. Thus cold
ambient air is heated up to defined temperatures, which are
measured with thermocouples at the locations shown in Fig. 3. At
each location at least 3 thermocouples were used. The test bed can
be used for tests with and without air return flow. For the purpose
of the current study, no return air flow was used, because the
capability of the material to convert radiation into heat should be
tested. A counter flow air/water heat exchanger was used to cool
down the air temperature to protect the following components
(mass flow meter, blower) from high temperatures. Furthermore
the determination of the absorbed energy is easier and more pre￾cise if the enthalpy gain of the water circuit is measured. Besides air
and water temperatures also flow rates of water and air are
measured and logged with a standard pc-based data acquisition
system.
Additionally, radiation flux and surface temperature are
measured with separate devices. For the radiation flux, the camera￾target system FATMES with an accuracy of 5% is employed [7].
Surface temperature has been monitored with standard infrared
thermography.
Efficiency is calculated according to equation (1):
h ¼ Qabs=Qrad (1)
Here, Qrad is the irradiative flux from the lamps penetrating onto
the aperture of the sample. It has been determined by integrating
Nomenclature
A inlet surface of the receiver, m2
AV specific surface, m2
/m3
CP specific isobaric heat, J/(kg K)
C emissivity∙Stefan Boltzmann constant, W/(m2 K4
)
I radiative flux density, W/m2
K permeability, m2
k thermal conductivity, W/(m K)
m_ mass flow rate density, kg/(s m2
)
M_ mass flow rate, kg/s
Nu Nusselt number, e
p pressure, Pa
Q power, W
q power per unit volume, W/m3
q0 solid/fluid convective heat exchange, W/m3
Re Reynolds number, e
T air temperature, K
T2 solid temperature, K
u velocity, m/s
z coordinate along the main flow direction, m
Greek symbols
a convective heat transfer coefficient, W/(m2 K)
h coefficient of the dynamical viscosity, kg/(m s)
εp porosity, e
r density, kg/m3
x extinction coefficient of the radiation, 1/m
4 inlet angle of the radiation flow, 
ε emissivity, e
g reflectivity
Indices
rad radiative
abs absorptive
0 located at the irradiated front surface (radiative flux
density)
inlet located at the irradiated front surface (entrance of the
air flow into the absorber)
outlet located at the outlet of the air flow from the absorber
Fig. 1. Photographs of the Jülich Solar Tower (left), a part of a single absorber module and the solar receiver during installation.
656 Th. Fend et al. / Renewable Energy 60 (2013) 655e661
the flux density map, which has been generated with FATMES, Qabs
is the measured enthalpy difference in the water circuit and the
enthalpy difference in the air flow behind the heat exchanger:
Qabs ¼ M_ inlet,cP,ðToutlet  TinletÞ (2)
Solar-to-thermal efficiency and air outlet temperature are the pa￾rameters, which have been used for the comparison of the different
absorber types and the experimental and numerical results.
2.2. Numerical models
The two models developed are 3D-models and calculate the
entering concentrated radiation as well as the air flow and heat
transfer inside the porous receiver material. They have been
developed with the COMSOL Multiphysics code. The first one cal￾culates the flow inside the real geometry of the absorber’s
honeycomb-structure. Because of this complex structure, this
method requires a high number of elements in the flow region.
Thus, it may be applied only to a small excerpt of the total volume of
the receiver element. It cannot be used to describe the thermal
behavior of the whole receiver component consisting of more than
2000 channels. Therefore it is called the single-channel-model.
The second model considers the volume of the receiver as a
porous continuum with homogenized properties, which have been
either experimentally determined (permeability, effective heat
conductivity) or have been derived from the single-channel-model.
It is called the continuum model. It can be used to describe the
thermal behavior of the larger components, such as in this case
one-quarter of the whole receiver component consisting of
absorber and cup. It is able to describe radial heat transfer, which
occurs perpendicular to the main flow direction.
For the single channel model the following COMSOL modules
were used: (1) weakly compressible NaviereStokes, (2) convection
and heat conduction in the air and (3) heat conduction in the solid
phase. The differential equations referring to the modules are
provided in Table 1. The NaviereStokes module includes the Nav￾iereStokes equation, the energy conservation law and the equation
of continuity. By simultaneously solving these equations the mo￾tion of a Newtonian fluid depending on the pressure at the
boundary and viscous effects inside the fluid may be described. The
other two modules use the general equations for conductive and
convective heat transfer.
In case of the continuum model the Brinkmann-equation for
porous materials instead of the NaviereStokes equation has been
used for domains, in which flow through a porous medium is
described (Table 2).
Both, the single channel model as well as the continuum model
make it possible to calculate velocity and temperature fields in the
single channel and in the total volume of the receiver element.
Since two heat transfer equations are solved simultaneously for the
gaseous and the solid phase of the porous continuum two inde￾pendent temperature fields are calculated. Energy exchange be￾tween the two phases is regarded by integrating a term describing
the volumetric solid-to-fluid heat transfer by convection:
q0 ¼ a,AVðT2  TÞ
Because of the full symmetry of the geometry in the single
channel as well in the whole receiver module, in both models only
one-quarter of the volume was calculated.
Fig. 2. Experimental set-up for absorber testing during operation (left), Xenon short￾arc-lamps (right).
Fig. 3. Flow-scheme of the experimental set-up. 1 e absorber sample, 2 e receiver cup, 3 e hot gas tube, 4 e air blower, 5 e heat exchanger, 6 e mass flow measurement, 7 e heater
for return air (not used), 8 e return-air chamber, 9/10 e thermal insulation.
Th. Fend et al. / Renewable Energy 60 (2013) 655e661 657
2.2.1. Boundary and area conditions of the numerical models
The concept of a volumetric heat source of the absorbed heat in
the solar receiver was used for the calculation. As it is known from
previous experimental and numerical investigations, which are
reviewed in Ref. [5], the intensity of the radiation is attenuated in
the cellular material due to a multiple reflection/absorption pro￾cess, it can be described by an exponential law:
I ¼ I0,ex,z (3)
Here, I0 [W/m2
] is the inlet heat flux, x [1/m] is the extinction co￾efficient and z is the coordinate in flow direction. The heat flux I0
used for the simulation was according to the average experimental
value in the solar simulator, which has been 650 kW/m2
. This value
is according to the lay-out data of the Jülich Solar Tower at design
point. The extinction coefficient was found experimentally
(through transmittance measurements of the samples with
different thickness) as it was described in Ref. [5]. It was 2300 1/m.
The main area- and boundary-conditions of both numeric
models are presented below in Tables 1 and 2 as simplified
descriptions.
A more detailed description of the continuum model is pre￾sented in Ref. [8]. The inlet value of the radiation flux with the
extinction coefficient and volumetric heat transfer coefficient was
used for the determination of the volumetric heat source for the air
and for the solid body. The volumetric heat transfer coefficient a,AV
was calculated from the specific surface AV of the sample [m2
/m3
]
and coefficient of the heat transfer, which was determined from the
numerical heat flow distribution of the single channel model.
3. Results and discussions
The single channel model was used to compare two different
channel/wall geometries of the receiver element as far as the in￾fluence on the receiver’s solar-to-thermal efficiency is concerned.
Both geometries have been also investigated experimentally. In
contrast to this, a geometry modification of the whole receiver
module was investigated with the continuum model. An additional
frustum-like geometry has been chosen by the manufacturer to
homogenize the receiver front temperature. In the experimental
tests and in the calculations this geometry was expected to show
improved efficiency properties.
3.1. The results of the single channel model
The two different channel/wall dimensions considered are
shown in Table 3 together with the corresponding values of the
specific surface area and additional flow and radiation parameters.
The values for mass flow, inlet temperature and absorbed radiation
have been set according to the two experiments with samples with
the dimensions mentioned. Note that the same radiation condi￾tions have been chosen but since the second sample consists of
smaller dimensions the calculated region was smaller and so also
the absolute value of radiative power is smaller. Fig. 4 shows a
schematic cross-sectional view of the two geometries considered.
This numeric calculation yields flow velocity, solid and fluid
temperature as well as fluid density and pressure at any location of
the domains under consideration. Fig. 5 shows the air temperature
distribution in the channel with the standard geometry. Passing the
channel the air heats up from 40 to more than 750 at the outlet.
Fig. 6 shows the corresponding wall-to-fluid heat flow distribution
along the channel in flow direction. The air temperature distribu￾tion shows large temperature gradients in the inlet area. After
approximately 20 mm the temperature proceeds constantly. This
has been expected due to the large difference between fluid and
Table 1
Area and boundary conditions of the single-channel model.
Module Domain conditions Boundary conditions
Inlet Outlet
Weakly compressible NaviereStokes h,VðVu þðVuÞ
T Þ¼ r,u,Vu Velocity Pressure without the viscose stress
Vðr,uÞ¼ 0 r ¼ rðp; TÞ u ¼ u0 p ¼ p0
Convection and heat conduction in air Vðk,VT þ r,cP,u,TÞ¼ q0 Temperature Convection flow
T ¼ T0 n,ðk,VTÞ¼ 0
Heat conduction in the solid body Vðk,VT2Þ¼ q0 Heat flow (radiation) Temperature
n,ðk,VT2Þ¼ q0 þ C,ðT4
amb  T4
2 Þ T2 ¼ T
q0 ¼ Qabsorb,
x,expðx,zÞ
AQ q0 ¼ I0  F,ðT2  T0Þ
C ¼ ε,5:67,108
Table 2
Area and boundary conditions of the continuum model.
Module Domain conditions Boundary conditions
Inlet Outlet
Weakly compressible
NaviereStokes Brinkmann
h,VðVu þðVuÞ
T Þ¼ r,u,Vu e in air Velocity Pressure without the
viscose stress
p ¼ p0
Vðr,uÞ¼ 0 r ¼ rðp; TÞ

1
εp

h,VðVu þðVuÞ
T Þ¼ h
K

,u e in porous material u ¼ u0
Convection and heat
conduction in air
Vðk,VT þ r,cP,u,TÞ¼ q0 Temperature Convection flow
q0 ¼ a,AVðT2  TÞ T ¼ T0 n,ðk,VTÞ¼ 0
Heat conduction in the
solid body
Heat flow (radiation) Temperature
Vðk,VT2Þ¼ q0 k,VT2 ¼ q0 þ C,ðT T2 ¼ T 4
amb  T4
2 Þ
q0 ¼ I0,εp,x,expðx,zÞ,cosa þ a,AV,ðT  T2Þ q0 ¼ I0,cos 4,ð1  εpÞð1  εpÞ,F,ðT2  T0Þ
k ¼ð1  εpÞ,280:7,expð0:0021,T2Þ C ¼ ε,5:67,108
Table 3
Sizes and inlet parameters of the cylindrical samples.
Sample Channel
width [m]
Wall
thickness
[m]
Specific
surface
[m2
/m3
]
Mass flow
for the whole
sample [kg/s]
Tinlet
[C]
Qabs
[W]
I0
[kW/m2
]
1 0.00218 0.00055 1170 2.4$103 45.1 1.16 650
2 0.00143 0.00025 2027 2.5$103 47.0 0.43 650
658 Th. Fend et al. / Renewable Energy 60 (2013) 655e661
solid temperature in this region. These results are confirmed by the
heat flow distribution (Fig. 6), which was also used for the deter￾mination of the volumetric heat transfer coefficient as an effective
quantity representing the overall heat transfer capability of the
absorber material. This quantity is later used for the continuum
model.
Fig. 7 shows a comparison of the air and wall temperature in the
main flow direction of the two geometries. The air temperature is
taken in the center of the channel. The absorber material with
smaller channels shows lower front temperatures. Furthermore the
air temperature increases more quickly due to an increased surface
area, which results in a lower convective heat resistance. The
comparison with the experimental data is shown in Table 4.
The comparison shows that the average difference between the
simulated and measured outlet temperatures and thermal effi￾ciency is approximately 1e2%, which confirms the capability of the
proposed numeric model.
3.2. The results of the continuum model
As mentioned in the Introduction, the continuum model was
foreseen to investigate the influence of geometrical modifications
of the whole honeycomb inlet (absorber). As modifications, an
absorber sample with a frustum and one without a frustum have
been compared experimentally as well as numerically using the
continuum model. The geometry difference can be seen in Fig. 9.
Note that due to symmetry reasons only one-quarter of the
absorber has been considered, so that the white straight line and
the white dashed straight line are showing the symmetry axis of
cup and absorber. The motivation for choosing this frustum
Fig. 4. Cross-sectional detail of the receiver samples.
Fig. 5. Air temperature field in the channel.
Fig. 6. Heat flow distribution in the channel.
Fig. 7. Calculated air and wall temperature distribution in main flow direction (in the
center of the absorber channel).
Th. Fend et al. / Renewable Energy 60 (2013) 655e661 659
geometry was the result of simple fluid mechanical considerations.
Since the fluid velocity in the middle of the receiver cup was ex￾pected to be higher than at the edges, an additional pressure drop
by longer channels had to be created in the central region to ach￾ieve homogeneous flow.
The irradiative flow in the experiment ranged from 300 kW/m2
to 700 kW/m2
. To regard the experimental boundary conditions as
good as possible, the integral value over the aperture area of the
absorber has been calculated and divided by 4 since the volume
considered was one-quarter of the absorber. This quantity has than
be multiplied with the absorptivity of the absorber to use it as a
volumetric heat source in the model as described in Section 2. The
receiver’s real geometry including absorber and containment (cup)
was implemented. The version with frustum is shown in Fig. 8. The
fluid domains are shown as white areas. Since the point of interest
was the performance of the honeycomb material as an absorber,
heat transfer at the outer surface of the cup was not regarded to
reduce the model.
Fig. 9 shows the velocity distributions as a comparison between
the geometry with and without frustum. The velocity field has a
parabolic profile for both samples. However, gradients in the di￾rections perpendicular to the main flow direction are significantly
higher in the sample with frustum. This is due to the larger hy￾draulic resistance in the center of this geometry.
The diagram in Fig. 10 shows the comparison of the calculated
velocity for both geometries at the center of the receiver in flow
direction. The domains 1, 2, 2.1 and 3 correspond to the inlet
domain, the receiver’s domain without frustum, the receiver’s
domain with frustum and the outlet domain. The results present
lower air velocities in the geometry with frustum as a consequence
of the larger hydraulic resistance. In Section 3, the velocity in￾creases due to the smaller cross-section of the cup.
Fig. 11 shows the temperature distribution at the inlet surfaces
of the receiver with and without frustum. The distribution is ho￾mogeneous for the sample with frustum and non-homogeneous for
the sample without frustum. The non-homogeneous distribution
can be explained by the lower mass flow at the edges of the receiver
element close to the cup walls in comparison to the central region.
The diagram in Fig. 12 shows the calculated solid and fluid
temperature distribution along the center line of the absorber in
Table 4
Comparison of the receiver outlet temperatures (numeric and measured).
Sample Measured values Simulated values
Tout [C] Thermal
efficiency [%]
Tout [
C] Thermal
efficiency [%]
1 699  5 72  5 684 74
2 701  5 75  5 688 76
Fig. 8. The geometry of the continuum model.
Fig. 9. Velocity fields in the two receiver geometries calculated with the continuum model.
Fig. 10. Comparison of the calculated (continuum model) velocity distribution in the
center of the receiver (dotted line in Fig. 9).
660 Th. Fend et al. / Renewable Energy 60 (2013) 655e661
flow direction (continuous white line in Fig. 9). 30 mm behind the
inlet in flow direction the difference between the solid and the fluid
temperature without frustum is 7 C. In case of the sample with
frustum the difference between fluid and solid temperature be￾comes zero. The remaining difference between fluid and solid
temperature in the case of the absorber without a frustum shows,
that not all thermal energy of the absorber has been transferred to
the fluid, thus the thermal efficiency of this sample is lower.
Table 5 gives an overview of the main experimental and nu￾merical results. The influence of the frustum on the efficiency is
positive. The correspondence between experimentally and
numerically determined air outlet temperature values is good.
4. Conclusions
The comparison of the numerical and experimental results
shows a correspondence for the single channel model with only 1e
2% of divergence. The sample with the finer structure exhibits some
advantages because of the smaller convective thermal resistance
due to an increased heat transfer surface. Furthermore, the single
channel model can be used to determine the volumetric convective
heat transfer coefficient of the honeycomb material investigated.
This is a useful quantity, which can be used for reduced numerical
models such as the continuum model.
The comparison between the geometry with and without
frustum shows a larger thermal efficiency for the sample with
frustum. This is true for both, the numerical as well as the experi￾mental data reported.
Both of the presented models can be used to predict tempera￾tures and velocity distributions in the volumetric solar air receiver.
The continuum model can be further improved if the measured
distribution of the concentrated solar radiation is considered in
more detail. Finally it can be used as a tool to further optimize the
receiver by geometric modifications.
Acknowledgments
This study has been carried out in the framework of the project
OVABSOL, which stands for “optimization of volumetric absorber
modules for the improvement of efficiency, reliability and
competitiveness of the system technology”. It was funded by the
German Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and
Nuclear Safety. The support is gratefully acknowledged.
The experimental work would not have been possible without
the enormous co-operative support of the solar furnace/solar
simulator-team of the Institute of Solar Research consisting of
Christian Willsch, Christian Raeder and Gerd Dibowski. They have
always been helpful and created a convenient and inspiring at￾mosphere. Special thanks to them.
References
[1] Fricker H. Bull. SEV/VSE; 76: 10e6.
[2] Romero M, Buck R, Pacheco JE. An update on solar central receiver systems, projects,
and technologies. Journal of Solar Energy Engineering 2002;124:98e108.
[3] Kribus A, Zaibel R, Carrey D, Segal A, Karni J. A solar-driven combined cycle
power plant. Solar Energy 1998;62(2):121e9.
[4] Becker M, Fend Th, Hoffschmidt B, Pitz-Paal R. Theoretical and numerical
investigation of flow stability in porous materials applied as volumetric solar
receivers. Solar Energy 2006;80:1241e8.
[5] Fend Th, Hoffschmidt B, Pitz-Paal R, Reutter O. Chapter: “cellular ceramics use
in solar radiation conversion”. from the book M.Scheffler and P.Colombo:
“Cellular ceramics: structure, manufacturing and applications”. Weinheim:
Wiley e VCH GmbH & Co. KgA; 2005.
[6] Fend Th, Hoffschmidt B, Pitz-Paal R, Reutter O, Rietbrock P. Porous materials as
open volumetric solar receivers experimental determination of thermophysical
and heat transfer properties. Energy 2004;29(5e6):823e33.
[7] Kalt A, Becker M, Dibowski G, Groer U, Neumann A. The new solar furnace of
the DLR, Koeln, Germany, specifications and first test results. In: Proceedings of
the 7th international symposium on solar thermal concentrating technologies,
September 26-30, Moscow 1994. p. 1023e35.
[8] Smirnova Olena, Fend Thomas, Schöllgen Daniel. Numeric modeling of a
compact high temperature heat exchanger. In: COMSOL conference 2011 pro￾ceedings. COMSOL conference Stuttgart 2011, 26.-28. Okt.2011, Stuttgart 2011.
Fig. 11. Solid receiver temperatures at the inlet surface (with frustum left, without frustum right).
Fig. 12. The numerically determined temperature distribution in the center of the
receiver volume in flow direction.
Table 5
Comparison between the experimental and numeric results of the continuum
model.
Inlet mass
flow [kg/s]
Tin [
C] Experimental values Numeric values
Tout [
C] hexp [%] Tout [
C] hexp [%]
Sample with
frustum (1)
0.02 67  2 500.5  5 89.3  5 517 91.7
Sample without
frustum (2)
0.0189 74  2 500  5 82.3  5 538 89.1
Th. Fend et al. / Renewable Energy 60 (2013) 655e661 661