Full Review Article
Advances in porous volumetric solar receivers and enhancement of
volumetric absorption
Ya-Ling He a,*
, Shen Du a
, Sheng Shen b
a Key Laboratory of Thermo-Fluid Science and Engineering of Ministry of Education, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
710049, China
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Porous media
Volumetric solar receiver
Experiment progress
Direct pore-scale simulation
Volume averaging simulation
Volumetric absorption enhancement
ABSTRACT
Porous volumetric solar receivers are one type of solar receivers that can volumetrically absorb solar radiation and
achieve efficient solar-to-thermal energy conversion. Porous volumetric solar receivers have been developed since
1980s. In this review, we focus on the development progress of the atmospheric and pressurized porous volu￾metric solar receivers, in which the structural designs, the material selections, the experimental research methods,
the comparison of thermal performance, and the transient response characteristic of the receivers were reviewed.
On the other hand, the theoretical research methods including the direct pore-scale and volume averaging sim￾ulations were introduced. The pore-scale reconstruction method and the procedure to investigate the fluid flow
and heat transfer processes at the pore-scale were presented. For the volume averaging method, detailed de￾scriptions for the selection of empirical parameters in the governing equations to be solved were summarized.
Typical research results based on these methods were presented and research limitations were also pointed out.
Furthermore, the methods for the enhancement of volumetric absorption and the improvement of thermal effi￾ciency of the receivers have been comprehensively reviewed. Two methods including geometrical parameters
optimization and spectrally selective absorption were presented in detail. This review will provide a better un￾derstanding of the development and research methods for porous volumetric solar receivers, and inspire future
studies for the performance improvement of the receivers.
1. Introduction
The large-scale application of clean, low-carbon renewable energies
has become a global consensus to resolve pressing issues such as climate
change, environmental pollution, and energy shortage. Among various
types of renewable energies, solar energy has a bright prospect due to its
vast amount, clean utilization and easy access. In order to overcome the
major problems associated with solar energy harvesting such as low
energy density and inefficient energy conversion, concentrating solar
power (CSP) technology has become one of important methods to
convert solar energy to electricity. Based on the CSP Gen3 demonstration
roadmap, the operation temperature of the system should be further
elevated to above 700 C for realizing the targeted 50% solar-to￾electricity conversion efficiency [1,2]. However, there still exist many
challenges in the solar receiver design, high temperature material se￾lection, energy storage subsystem optimization. In a CSP system, the solar
receiver is directly irradiated by solar radiation and its safe and
high-efficiency operation is the key to increase the overall
solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency and reduce the levelized cost of
energy (LCOE) [3,4].
Based on the solar absorption process, solar receivers could be mainly
divided into three types: tubular receiver, volumetric receiver, and par￾ticle receiver. The tubular receiver absorbs solar radiation on its outer
surface and conducted the thermal energy to the heat transfer fluid inside
the tube. The low thermal conductivity of high temperature alloy and the
low convective heat transfer coefficient between tube and heat transfer
fluid create a large thermal resistance, which leads to high receiver
temperature and large thermal radiative loss [5,6]. Despite using the
fluid to absorb and transfer heat, the particle receiver converts and stores
solar energy based on solid particles. Depending on the flow direction of
the solid particles, the particle receiver could be further divided into
downflow, upflow, and horizontal flow types. The light leakage, particle
flow control, and corrosion issues should be examined to improve the
performance of the particle receiver [7,8]. On the other hand, the volu￾metric solar receiver distributes the incoming solar radiation into a three
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yalinghe@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (Y.-L. He).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy Reviews
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/energy-reviews
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enrev.2023.100035
Received 18 March 2023; Received in revised form 16 June 2023; Accepted 16 June 2023
2772-9702/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Shenzhen City Clean Energy Research Institute, Shenzhen University. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035

dimensional space. The concentration of solar flux on the receiver surface
is reduced and the maximum allowable solar flux on the aperture of the
receiver is increased.
In general, the volumetric absorption of solar radiation could be
implemented by both the heat transfer fluid and porous media. The
commonly used heat transfer fluids have low extinction coefficients to
solar radiation and nanoparticles made of metals, nonmetallic oxides,
and carbon materials are usually introduced [9,10] to form nanofluids, as
shown in Fig. 1(a). By changing the particle type, size, and concentration,
the optical properties of the nanofluids could be adjusted and the solar
radiation could be gradually absorbed. In order to overcome the stability
issue of nanofluids, the concentrated solar power on demand (CSPonD)
[11,12] proposed a collocated receiver and storage system based on the
solar radiation absorption by molten salt as shown in Fig. 1(b). Due to the
low extinction of molten salt, the entire depth of the molten salt tank
should be over several meters.
On the other hand, porous materials are widely used for solar ab￾sorption due to its large porosity and interconnected porous skeleton.
The common porous structures include honeycombs, wire meshes,
packed beds, and foams made from metallic or ceramic materials. The
solar absorption and conversion processes inside the porous media are
illustrated in Fig. 1(c). The concentrated solar radiation penetrates into
the porous structure and is gradually absorbed. The heat transfer fluid
(normally air) passes through the porous structure and exchange heat
with the high temperature porous skeleton. In the ideal case, the fluid
and porous medium temperature increases gradually along the main flow
direction, which means that the receiver surface temperature is greatly
reduced and this phenomenon is known as a volumetric effect [16,17].
Porous volumetric solar receivers show potential for increasing the
solar-to-thermal conversion efficiency, but the heat transfer character￾istics such as strong coupling, multiscale, and multimode pose challenges
in experimental and numerical analyses. Firstly, a set of parameters such
as geometries, optical and thermophysical properties of the porous media
as well as the incident solar radiation distribution simultaneously influ￾ence the fluid flow and heat transfer processes in porous volumetric solar
receivers. Secondly, the small scale of porous channels and the large scale
of CSP systems require multiscale modeling of fluid flow and heat
transfer in the porous volumetric solar receiver. Thirdly, multiple heat
transfer mechanisms such as solar radiation transfer, heat conduction in
the porous media, convective heat transfer between the porous skeleton
and the heat transfer fluid, and radiative heat transfer create difficulties
in evaluating the performances of the porous volumetric solar receiver.
Therefore, many efforts have been taken on the porous volumetric solar
receiver to delve deeply into the heat transfer process and put forward
new methods for enhancing volumetric absorption.
In this review, the development of porous volumetric solar receivers
is elaborated and the progresses in experimental and numerical studies
are thoroughly reviewed. The methods to enhance the volumetric ab￾sorption and improve the thermal performance of porous volumetric
solar receivers are comprehensively summarized.
2. Advances in experiment research on porous volumetric solar
receivers
The porous volumetric solar receiver could be categorized as atmo￾spheric (open) and pressurized types, and the main difference is the
operating pressure of the heat transfer fluid. The major component of
these two types of receivers is a porous structure, which usually uses high
temperature resistant materials such as nicked-based superalloy (Inconel
600, Inconel 601, Alloy 230) and refractory ceramics (SiSiC, reSiC).
Based on the intrinsic absorption or coating material, the incident solar
radiation can be efficiently and gradually absorbed inside the porous
structure. The typical structures of atmospheric and pressurized porous
volumetric solar receivers are presented in Fig. 2. Atmospheric porous
volumetric solar receivers have the porous structure, supporting struc￾ture, and air channel. The porous structure is directly exposed to the
Nomenclature
a absorption coefficient
cf inertia coefficient
Dp particle diameter (m)
d diameter (m)
g asymmetry factor
h convective heat transfer coefficient (W/(m2
⋅K))
K permeability (m2
)
Nu Nusselt number
n refractive index
Pr Prandtl number
p pressure (Pa)
q Heat flux (W/m2
)
Re Reynolds number
T temperature (K)
U superficial velocity (m/s)
Greek symbols
β extinction coefficient (m-1)
ε porosity
λ thermal conductivity (W/(m⋅K))
μ dynamic viscosity (Pa⋅s)
σ λ Stefan-Boltzmann constant
σs scattering coefficient
Subscripts
c cell
d diameter
eff effective value
f fluid
h hydraulic
r radiation
s solid
Fig. 1. Volumetric absorption of solar energy (a)Nanofluids (Reproduced with permission [13]. Copyright 2012, Elsevier); (b)Molten salts (Reproduced with
permission [14]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier); (c)Porous media (Adapted with permission [15]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
2

incident solar radiation in atmosphere, and the ambient air is directly
sucked into the receiver. In order to scale up the system and conveniently
replace the damaged porous structure, the large-scale atmospheric
porous volumetric solar receiver usually adopts a modular design.
As for the pressurized porous volumetric solar receiver, more complex
structures need to be designed for maintaining the high operating pres￾sure, which could reach up to 2 MPa. In general, a highly transparent
window is necessary for sealing the cavity and allowing the solar radia￾tion to pass through. It should endure high temperature, large thermal
stress, and high pressure while having high transparency in the solar
spectrum. For efficiently reducing the window temperature, the inlet air
is usually directed to the window to cool it down and the preheated air is
beneficial for increasing the overall thermal efficiency. The secondary
concentrator is usually equipped to the pressurized porous volumetric
solar receiver, which offers possibility to further increase the air outlet
temperature to above 1000 C. However, the poor design and limited
machining precision may lead to non-uniform solar flux distribution and
large thermal stress. For example, the poor adhesive between the mirror
and background may cause breakage in the mirrors from overheating.
Additional water-cooling subsystem is needed to reduce the high tem￾perature of the secondary concentrator which increases the complexity
and unreliability of the system.
2.1. Development progress in the porous volumetric solar receivers
Experimental research on porous volumetric solar receivers began in
the 1980s. Fricker applied a wire mesh as the absorber and installed it on
the solar dish [20]. The air passed through the wire mesh and reached
842 C at the outlet of the receiver. Based on this solar thermal energy
utilization method, the porous volumetric solar receiver has been
extensively studied. Sulzer 1 and Sulzer 2 were the pilot receivers with
output power over 200 kWth, which were both integrated into the CSP
system at Plataforma Solar de Almeria (PSA) [20,21]. Despite the lower
thermal efficiency compared with the estimated value, the Sulzer tech￾nology has accumulated experience in system operation and receiver
transient performance testing. In 1993, Phoebus-TSA was tested at PSA
which was the first megawatt-scale atmospheric porous volumetric solar
receiver [22]. Its modular receiver was in the hexagon shape with a
diameter of 280 mm and the entire aperture diameter of the receiver was
3400 mm. The outlet air temperature and the output power of the
receiver reached 700 C and 2.9 MW, respectively. The Phoebus-TSA also
introduced the air-return system to reutilize the thermal energy of the
exhaled air. The thermal efficiency reached 85% when the air return ratio
and the outlet temperature were 60% and 700 C, respectively. More￾over, the Phoebus-TSA attempted to integrate thermal storage, steam
generator, and electric power generation subsystems. The steam tem￾perature and pressure ranges were 480-540 C and 3.5-15 MPa, respec￾tively [20,23]. It is known that the outlet temperature of air is usually
limited by the maximum allowable temperature of the porous media.
Therefore, German Aerospace Center (DLR) promoted the application of
ceramic materials for the porous volumetric solar receiver. In the same
period of Sulzer, the CeramTec made of SiSiC was designed by DLR which
had a staggered layout of the front. The reduced front surface decreased
the reflective loss such that the maximum outlet air temperature reached
782 C[24]. Hereafter, many ceramic atmospheric porous volumetric
solar receivers were designed and tested, in which HiTRec and SOLAIR
made this technology mature [25]. The honeycomb SiC porous structure
was selected by HiTRec [26] and SOLAIR [27], and the modular design
concept and air return system were adopted. The outlet air temperature
of 800 C was achieved with the thermal efficiency exceeding 80% for
HiTRec I, HiTRec II, and SOLAIR 200. Compared with SOLAIR 200, the
SOLAIR 3000 system further raised the number of modular receivers
from 36 to 270, and the incident solar power reached 2950 kW [20,28].
In 2009, Solar Tower Jülich shown in Fig. 3 applied the technology of
HiTRec and was in solar operation for a long period of time [29,30].
Under the solar only operation mode, the outlet air temperature achieved
650 C and a 1 MW electric power was delivered to the regional grid.
On the other hand, coupling the CSP system with the combined cycle
can improve solar energy utilization efficiency and reduce the LCOE,
which promotes the development of the pressurized porous volumetric
solar receiver. DLR developed PLVRCs (Pressure Loaded Volumetric
Ceramic Receiver) with rated thermal power of 5 kW and 500 kW and put
them into test in the solar furnace of Sandia and PSA, respectively [19].
The outlet air temperature of PLVRC-5 achieved 1000 C while the air
pressure was kept at 0.42 MPa. However, the performance of PLVRC-500
deviated largely from the design condition due to the insufficient cooling
in the secondary concentrator and the non-uniform air mass flow dis￾tribution. REFOS [32,33] applied wire meshes as the absorber and
improved the secondary concentrator design to improve the optical ef￾ficiency. During the test in PSA, the outlet air temperature achieved 800
C but the cracks in the transparent window was also observed.
Directly-Irradiated Annular Pressurized Receiver (DIAPR) [34] designed
by Weizmann Institute of Science utilized a frustum-like high-pressure
window, which improved the capability of withstanding high pressure
(1.7-2.0 MPa). It arranged the absorbers with porcupine blocks, and the
enhanced convective heat transfer led to a high outlet air temperature of
1200 C with a thermal efficiency of 71%. Based on the technologies of
REFOS and DIAPR, SOLGATE [35] and DIAPR multistage [20] connected
the cavity receiver and the pressurized porous volumetric solar receiver
for efficient utilization of solar radiation with different intensities. For
example, SOLGATE arranged the low temperature receiver and the high
temperature receiver in series and preheated the air in the low temper￾ature receiver. The outlet air temperature achieved 800 C, which
generated electric power of 230 kW. Despite that Soltrec [36] and other
studies [37,38] conducted at the lab-scale further investigated the per￾formance of pressurized porous volumetric solar receivers, the develop￾ment of this type of receivers was slow and no receiver at large scale was
built. Considering for the high efficiency of combined cycle and the
simple scheme of atmospheric porous volumetric solar receivers, the
CAPTure project introduced regenerative heat exchangers and combined
these two technologies [39]. The atmospheric heating and pressurized
cooling processes were separated as shown in Fig. 4, and the
Fig. 2. Schematics of porous volumetric solar receivers (a)HiTRec type [18] Reproduced under the terms of the CC-BY licenses; (b) PLVCR500 (Reproduced with
permission [19]. Copyright 1991, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
3

solar-to-electric efficiency of the solar combined cycle was 29.6% under
500 suns. Recently, Zaversky et al. [40,41] presented that the combined
cycle introduced by CAPTure project was not economically competitive
and in-field test encountered critical issues related to the turbine start-up.
A hybrid CSP power plant coupled with compressed air energy storage
was proposed which showed potential to increase the shares of renew￾ables for the future power grid.
2.2. Thermal efficiency analysis of porous volumetric solar receivers
The outlet air temperature and the thermal efficiency are the two key
indicators to evaluate solar receivers. The outlet air temperature is
determined by many factors such as the intensity and distribution of
incident solar radiation, the air mass flow rate and distribution, as well as
the structure and geometrical parameters of the porous media. The
higher the outlet air temperature is, the more efficient the power cycle is.
The higher thermal efficiency of the receiver could be achieved by
limiting the thermally conductive, convective and radiative losses. A
higher thermal efficiency means that the solar radiation is effectively
captured, absorbed and converted.
The thermal efficiency of a receiver is defined as the ratio of absorbed
energy by the heat transfer fluid and the total incident solar energy. As
for the absorbed energy by the receiver, the direct or indirect measure￾ments could be used. The inlet and outlet air temperatures can be
monitored by the thermocouples, and the absorbed energy can be
calculated by temperature increase and air mass flow rate. In the ex￾periments, the non-uniform distribution of solar radiation usually leads
to a non-uniform distribution of air temperature. Therefore, more ther￾mocouples are needed for measuring the air temperature distribution. On
the other hand, the indirect method based on the energy conservation
could also be applied to evaluated the thermal efficiency. Despite
monitoring the fluid temperature, the indirect method measures the
absorbed energy by the heat transfer fluid by applying a heat exchanger
to cool down the air, which can be evaluated based on the temperature
variation and efficiency of the heat exchanger. Ideally, the absorbed
energy by the heat transfer fluid can be all removed by the heat
exchanger. One advantage of the indirect method is that the measure￾ment of air mass flow rate is no longer needed.
The incident solar radiation distribution could also be measured by
direct and indirect methods. The direct method applied heat flux gage to
measure the solar flux in the aperture of the receiver. In order to capture
the solar flux map, multiple gages arranged regularly are usually needed.
In these studies [21,24,42,43], multiple heat flux gages were placed in a
cross shape and the solar flux in the two perpendicular directions is
captured. This measurement presents a small deviation as the solar flux
distribution is centrosymmetric. In HiTRec II, a special heat flux gage
with a quick response time was adopted and installed on a mobile bar
[26]. The mobile bar swept through the receiver aperture and quickly
recorded solar flux data at different positions. Apparently, this quick
response heat flux gage offered a higher spatial resolution but required
delicate system design and components coordination. At the lab scale, the
diameter of solar flux is relatively small and the heat flux gage could be
precisely moved by the mapping system [44]. The indirect method uses
the Lambertian target and CCD camera to capture the grey level image of
solar radiation. The intensity of solar radiation is linked to the grey level
of the image which is calibrated by the heat flux gage at one fixed po￾sition, such as HERMES and ProHERMES [45]. In this method, the
Lambertian target can be a large plate which covers the entire receiver
Fig. 3. Solar Tower Jülich volumetric solar receiver (Reproduced with permission [31]. Copyright 2017, Elsevier).
Fig. 4. CAPTure project solar combined cycle (Reproduced with permission [40]. Copyright 2022, AIP Publishing).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
4

aperture or a small mobile plate which cooperates with the camera for
continuous shooting. For the large scale solar receiver where the Lam￾bertian target is not easy to be placed, the surface of the solar receiver can
be used as the target as presented in the Solar Tower Jülich system [29].
Compared with the direct method, the indirect method offers a high
spatial resolution and quick measurement. But the calibration of the
measurement systems has become a major difficulty due to the non-linear
relationship between the grey level image and the heat flux map as well
as the spectral reflectivity of the target.
Fig. 5 summarized the experimental tests results including the outlet
air temperature and the thermal efficiency of porous volumetric solar
receivers since 1980s. The porous volumetric solar receiver was catego￾rized into three groups as follows: receiver with no air return system or
preheating, receiver with air return system, and receiver with preheating.
In general, the atmospheric porous volumetric solar receiver with air
return system can increase the air outlet temperature while giving a
higher thermal efficiency. In HiTRec, SOLAIR, and TSA, the air return
ratio was controlled in the range of 40%-60%. It was estimated that the
thermal efficiency could be improved by 8% when the air return ratio
increases from 60% to 80% when maintaining the air outlet temperature
at 650 C[31]. Most of the receivers with preheating were the pressur￾ized type, and only Bechtel atmospheric porous volumetric solar receiver
was designed to have a Pyrex globe for preheating the inlet air. Under
different experimental cases, the temperature increases of air due to the
preheating could account for 20%-30% of the total air temperature in￾crease [43]. With regards to the pressurized porous volumetric solar
receiver, the outlet air temperature was generally higher due to the
concentrated solar radiation and air preheating. The outlet air tempera￾ture of the pressurized porous volumetric solar receiver PLVCR-5 and
DIAPR exceeded 1000 C. The maximum outlet air temperature for the
atmospheric porous volumetric solar receiver was achieved by
Mey-Cloutier et al. [46], in which the incident solar radiation was ho￾mogenized by a homogenizer and the outlet air temperature reached 958
C. Moreover, it is seen from Fig. 5 that the ranges of the outlet air
temperature and thermal efficiency are large, so it is difficult to directly
compare two receivers under different test conditions. Despite that some
studies [26,27] recommended to use air outlet temperature-mass specific
energy graphic for comparing the receivers, it is still hard to evaluate
different receivers under different test conditions (e.g. solar radiation
intensity, distribution, air mass flow).
2.3. Transient performance of porous volumetric solar receivers
The porous volumetric solar receiver has a quick transient response
time and small thermal inertia due to the shorter flow path of the heat
transfer fluid. Up to now, there is no standard for the receiver transient
performance and many studies adopted time constant to restabilize the
system after changing the solar radiation intensity. In the transient test of
Sulzer [21], the number of mirrors in the heliostat was reduced when the
outlet air temperature was stable. The incident solar energy was reduced
by 20%, and the outlet air temperature was correspondingly decreased.
By monitoring the variation of the outlet air temperature, it was found
that it took 6 min to restabilize the system and the time constant was
about 90 s. With a similar test method, the time constants for Sandia foam
[47], CeramTec [24], and HiTRec II [26] are 365 s, 660 s, and 70 s,
respectively. The parametric and non-parametric methods were both
adopted for SOLAIR [28] and the time constant of the receiver was
determined to 600-840 s. In the test of DIAPR [34], the receiver regained
90% of the temperature drop within less than 5 min after reopening the
shutter. Besides, some studies used the temperature increasing rate to
evaluate the transient performance of the porous volumetric solar
receiver. The temperature increasing rate of PLVCR-5 [19] was measured
which achieved 80 C/s. Zhu et al. [37] measured the outlet air tem￾perature increase process and found that time to stabilize the system was
about 30 min.
From the above studies, the time constant for porous volumetric solar
receivers is usually in the range of tens of seconds to hundreds of seconds.
Comparing the metallic and ceramic receivers, the transient response
time is normally smaller for the metallic receiver because of the higher
thermal conductivity. The quicker transient response time of porous
volumetric solar receivers is beneficial of fast start-up, but it needs higher
requirements in maintaining the stability of the outlet air temperature
and formulating system control strategies.
3. Advances in theoretical research on porous volumetric solar
receivers
To investigate the detailed fluid flow and heat transfer processes, the
multiscale simulation methods are applied. When the sophisticated
porous structures are considered, the simulation studies are performed at
pore-scale. The primary task is to reconstruct the porous geometry based
on the periodic unit cell, random, or X-ray CT reconstruction methods.
Then the solar radiation transfer and coupled heat transfer could be
solved based on direct pore-scale simulation method. On the other hand,
the porous domain can be treated at Representative Elementary Volume
(REV) scale. The influences of porous skeleton to the fluid flow and heat
transfer of the fluid are introduced by empirical parameters. Generally,
the direct pore-scale numerical simulation gives a precise result but re￾quires more computing resource. The volume-averaging simulation
method provide a quick performance evaluation, but its accuracy is
largely dependent on the proper determination of empirical parameters.
3.1. Direct pore-scale numerical simulation method
Direct pore-scale numerical simulation methods investigate the fluid
flow and heat transfer processes based on the detailed reconstructed
models of the porous media. It is an effective simulation method to reveal
the transport process inside the porous media and to determine the
empirical parameters. The reconstruction of the porous media and the
establishment of the heat transfer model for porous volumetric solar
receivers are presented as follows.
3.1.1. Pore-scale model reconstruction of the porous media
The porous media with different structures have been widely used as
porous volumetric solar receivers, such as honeycombs, wire meshes, and
foams. In order to enlarge the penetration depth of solar radiation, the
porous media usually have large porosity and interconnected channels.
Therefore, the pore-scale model of high porosity porous media is pre￾sented and the reconstruction method for the low porosity porous media
Fig. 5. Thermal efficiency of porous volumetric solar receivers. such as packed beds and rocks is not the focus of this study. Based on the
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
5

structure of the porous media, the pore-scale reconstruction method can
be divided into periodic unit cell reconstruction method, random
reconstruction method, and X-ray CT reconstruction method.
3.1.1.1. Periodic unit cell reconstruction method. Since many porous
media have certain periodic characteristics, the periodic unit cell
reconstruction method simplifies the porous skeleton into a spatial array
of ideal structural units. For example, honeycombs and wire meshes have
strict periodicities as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b). The periodic unit
structure can be easily extracted and the model reconstruction of these
types of porous media are not introduced. For the porous foam, it shows
some randomness as illustrated in Fig. 6(c), but it does have some peri￾odicities in analogy with aggregation of soap bubbles. The parameters
such as unit cell diameter, pore diameter, number of vertexes and edges
can be used to describe the porous structures.
Some studies [53,54] adopted a simple cube as the unit cell as shown
in Fig. 7(a). It simplifies the porous foam to a large extent, ignoring the
arrangement of the porous skeleton in other directions. By adjusting the
cell size and skeleton thickness, this model could control the pore density
and porosity of the reconstructed porous media. Moreover, the process￾ing characteristics during the fabrication of the porous media and more
structural features are included in the reconstruction process. For
graphite porous media, it has an approximately circular pore structure,
thus Yu et al. [55] and Karimian et al. [56] used a sphere-centered cube
as the unit cell as shown in Fig. 7(b). Similarly, the cell diameter and pore
diameter can be adjusted by changing the edge size and sphere diameter
in the unit cell. In the foaming process, the formation of bubble aggre￾gates is usually controlled by surface tension which leads to a lower
surface energy of each bubble. Therefore, the Kelvin structure has been
widely applied for the reconstruction of porous foams as illustrated in
Fig. 7(c). The Kelvin structure is formed by the truncated octahedron
with 6 square faces and 8 hexagonal faces, which has been considered to
be the unit body to equally divide the space with the smallest surface
area. Krishnan et al. [57,58] subtracted the cube with a sphere and got a
Kelvin structure with round pores in the faces. Bai and Chung [59]
subtracted the truncated octahedron with a sphere, and a similar Kelvin
structure was obtained. Compared with the Kelvin structure of Krishnan
et al., the Kelvin structure of Bai and Chung had straight edges. It is
noticed that the porous skeleton constructed by the above two methods is
thicker near the vertex and smaller at the center, showing the charac￾teristics of the skeleton thickness change caused during fabrication pro￾cess. In 1994, Weaire and Phelan [60] proposed a unit body that divides
the space better than the Kelvin structure and further minimizes the
surface area by 0.3%. As shown in Fig. 7(d), it is composed of six 14-sided
polyhedra and two 12-sided polyhedra. Boomsma [61] applied the
software of Surface Evolver to gradually minimize the surface energy of
the Weaire-Phelan structure and obtained the porous skeleton with
triangular cross section.
It is seen that the unit cell reconstruction method is simple and
effective and can capture the structural characteristics of the porous
media to a certain extent. However, this method ignores the randomness
of the porous media such as the distribution of pore size. Moreover, some
unit cells, such as simple cube and Kelvin structure, construct isotropic
porous structures which are different from real anisotropic porous foams.
3.1.1.2. Random reconstruction method. In order to introduce random￾ness in the reconstruction process of the porous media, several random
reconstruction methods have been proposed, and the representative one
is Voronoi tessellation, which is a method of dividing a plane or space
into specific areas based on a set of specific points. The distance from any
position in each area to the specific point is smaller than the distance to
the specific point in other areas. The areas in the Voronoi tessellation
method could be viewed as cells in the porous media, and the random
distribution creates the randomness of the reconstructed porous model.
Based on the random point generation method and whether the random
points are weighted or not, different Voronoi tessellations such as
Laguerre-Voronoi tessellation and Poisson-Voronoi tessellation were
built. The Laguerre-Voronoi tessellation method assigns weights for each
points which can be used to control the distribution of pore diameter
[62], and the reconstruction procedure based on this method is illus￾trated in Fig. 8. Firstly, the lognormal distribution was used to set the
pore size distribution of the porous media. Subsequently, spheres with
varying diameters were randomly and closely generated in the space
based on the pore size distribution. Finally, the Laguerre-Voronoi
tessellation of these random spheres was obtained, the solid structure
and the surface structure were deleted, and the remaining boundary
structures formed the porous skeleton. The study conducted by Wejrza￾nowski et al. [63] pointed out that the average number of faces per foam
cell of the reconstructed porous models was in the range of 13.7-14.5,
which was close to that of the actual porous media. The study of Nie
Fig. 6. Pore-scale models and porous volumetric solar receivers (a)Honeycomb (Adapted with permission [48]. Copyright 2013, Elsevier [49]; Copyright 2017,
Elsevier); (b)Wire mesh (Reproduced with permission [50]. Copyright 2014, Elsevier [51]; Copyright 2018, Elsevier); (c)Foam (Adapted with permission [52].
Copyright 2011, Elsevier).
Fig. 7. Periodic structures of porous media (a)Simple cube; (b) Sphere-centered
cube; (c)Kelvin; (d)Weaire-Phelan.
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
6

et al. [62] showed that different lognormal distributions could effectively
control the cell volume of the reconstructed porous media. The average
porosity and specific surface area can be adjusted by changing the ratio of
skeleton thickness and sphere diameter.
Furthermore, different random construction methods were proposed
based on the structural characteristics of the porous media. Kırca et al.
[64] proposed a reconstruction method using the random sphere gen￾eration for carbon foam porous media. Similar to the Laguerre-Voronoi
tessellation reconstruction process, a closely packed random spheres
were firstly generated, and structural parameters such as the porosity and
pore size distribution of the porous media were adjusted by controlling
the sphere center distance and the sphere diameter distribution. Subse￾quently, the closely packed spheres were directly subtracted from the
cube space, and the remaining part could be regarded as the porous
skeleton, as illustrated in Fig. 9(a).
Considering for the conciseness of the Kelvin structure and its lack of
randomness, Habisreuther et al. [65] proposed a random Kelvin structure
by relocating the nodes position of the ordered structure. Fig. 9(b)
compared the regular and random Kelvin structures. The node position
was stochastically relocated but the maximum distance was limited to
retain the original topological structure. However, compared with the
porous model reconstructed by Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI),
Habisreuther et al. found that the calculated pressure drop and tortuosity
in the random Kelvin structure was relatively small. Besides, numerical
methods such as multiple-point statistics [66], quartet structure
generation set [67] and other random reconstruction methods [68] have
been proposed for the reconstruction of the porous media with low
porosity such as rocks. These methods are not used in the field of porous
volumetric solar receivers and detailed description is no longer carried
out.
3.1.1.3. X-ray CT reconstruction method. With the application of imaging
technology and the improvement of computing capability, it is possible to
accurately capture and digitize the real three-dimensional structure of
the porous media. The X-ray computed tomography (CT) technology is
widely applied which is a nondestructive imaging technique with high
spatial resolution. The porous media reconstruction method based on the
X-ray CT scan is presented in Fig. 10. Firstly, the suitable CT scanner and
scan resolution should be determined. For the porous volumetric solar
receiver, the pore diameter and strut thickness are usually at the milli￾meter scale, and the reported scan resolution for the porous foam
reconstruction were normally in the range of 15-40 μm[69–79]. Several
studies tried to capture the finer structure of the porous skeleton and
utilized a higher scan resolution. For example, the scan resolutions in the
study of Ambrosio et al. [80] and Haussener et al. [81] were 4 μm and
0.37 μm, respectively. It should be pointed out that the high-resolution
scan is not compatible with a larger scan area and efficient numerical
calculations. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the size of the porous
media required for the numerical calculation and the current calculation
capability, and carefully choose the scan resolution. The reconstructed
Fig. 8. Procedures for foam structure generation based on the Laguerre-Voronoi tessellation (Reproduced with permission [62]. Copyright 2017, Elsevier).
Fig. 9. Random reconstruction methods (a)Random spherical bubbles method (Reproduced with permission [64]. Copyright 2007, Elsevier); (b)Random Kelvin
(Reproduced with permission [65]. Copyright 2009, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
7

porous media for numerical calculation in literature have been tens of
millimeters. Subsequently, the image processing such as noise reduction,
sharpening, and contrast enhancement were needed for the scan images
so as to better distinguish the porous skeleton from the background.
These images could then be binarized and are ready for
three-dimensional rendering. During the fabrication process of the
porous media, the small hollow structures can be noticed at the center of
the porous skeleton. In order to facilitate the subsequent mesh generation
and numerical calculation, these small hollow structures need to be filled.
Wang et al. [78] found that such filling processing had little effect on the
structural parameters of the reconstructed porous media. The relative
change of the porosity of the reconstructed porous media before and after
filling was only 0.47%. Furthermore, the softwares such as Simpleware、
VGStudio MAX、AVIZO、Mimics,and ImageJ could be applied for
three-dimensional rendering and geometry repair. Finally, the
three-dimensional model of the porous media could be exported to mesh
generation softwares such as ANSYS ICEM and Simpleware ScanFE.
Based on the above studies, periodic unit cell reconstruction method
can be directly selected for the reconstruction of honeycomb and wire
mesh structures. For the porous foam, the periodic unit cell reconstruc￾tion method and random generation method can capture some of the
structural characteristics of the porous structures and complexity of the
reconstruction process is relatively low. The X-ray CT reconstruction
method restores a more realistic three-dimensional structure of the
porous media, but the reconstruction steps are relatively cumbersome
and require higher computational resources.
3.1.2. Direct pore-scale numerical simulation of fluid flow and heat transfer
Based on the reconstructed porous models, the fluid flow and heat
transfer inside the porous media could be directly solved at pore-scale.
Direct pore-scale numerical simulation was mostly used in honeycomb
porous volumetric solar receivers, and a few studies have investigated the
porous volumetric solar receiver with packed bed and foam structures.
The solar radiation transport and fluid flow and heat transfer processes
inside the receivers are usually solved respectively because air is
considered as a non-participating material and the optical properties of
the porous media in the solar and infrared spectra are different. In the
studies of Nakakura et al. [82,83], the radiative properties such as
emissivity of the porous media were considered as constants and irrele￾vant to the spectrum. The incident solar radiation was adopted as the
inlet boundary condition to the radiative transfer equation. Taking into
account the solution methods of most studies, the solar radiation trans￾port and fluid flow and heat transfer processes are introduced
respectively.
3.1.2.1. Solar radiation transport in porous volumetric solar receivers. Po￾rous volumetric solar receivers are typically integrated into solar tower
and solar dish CSP systems. The different layouts of the CSP systems such
as the heliostat field distribution and focusing strategy lead to different
solar radiation intensities and distributions on the aperture of the re￾ceivers. Taking the solar tower CSP system as an example, researchers
have developed a series of methods such as Monte Carlo ray tracing
(MCRT) method and convolution method to investigate the solar radia￾tion transport in the heliostat field and inside the receiver [84]. Based on
the geometrical optics assumption, the MCRT method treats the solar
radiation transport as the behaviors of a series of random processes of a
large number of independent photons. The solar radiation distribution
could be obtained by counting the reflection, absorption and distribution
characteristics of photons. The implementation of the MCRT method is
flexible and suitable for complex geometries, and it is widely used in the
field of CSP. A series of commercial and open source programs have been
developed such as MIRVAL, SolTrace, Tonatiuh, and SPTOPTIC [84,85].
The research group of He has applied the MCRT method to develop the
optical models of different CSP systems, and the incident solar flux dis￾tribution and the optical properties have been determined [86–89].
Using the MATLAB toolbox developed by CIEMAT, Sanchez et al. [90]
tracing the solar radiation transport in the solar dish system with
different rim angles. Cagnoli et al. [49] and Ali et al. [91] applied
Tonatiuh to study the solar radiation transport in the solar furnace and
the solar tower system, respectively.
Distinguished from tubular solar receivers, the incident solar radia￾tion penetrates, transfers, reflects, and absorbs inside the porous volu￾metric solar receiver. These processes can also be studied by the MCRT
method and the implementation steps are shown in Fig. 11.
Considering that the pore-scale model of the porous volumetric solar
receiver is small, the studies adopted uniformly distribution solar radi￾ation with perpendicular irradiation or incident at a certain angle [79,82,
83,92]. Subsequently, a photon goes through several processes such as
reflection and absorption until it is no longer exist. The reflection de￾scribes the interaction of a photon with the porous skeleton and both
constant reflectivity and local reflectivity models can be used to update
the position and direction of the photon. The local reflectivity model
applies Snell's law and Fresnel equations to calculate the reflectivity, and
determines whether the photon is absorbed or not by comparing the local
reflectivity to a random number [93,94]. The updated direction of the
photon can be calculated based on diffuse or specular reflection laws. As
for the honeycomb porous volumetric solar receiver, Sanchez et al. [90]
and Cagnoli et al. [49] compared solar radiation distribution and optical
properties with diffuse and specular channels. The diffuse walls aggra￾vated the reflection loss in the front of the receiver, while the specular
walls increased the penetration depth of solar radiation. These studies
also pointed out that the actual reflection in the channels was a mixture
of diffuse and specular reflections. As for the porous foam, Guevelou et al.
[95] stated that the ratio of the surface roughness of the porous skeleton
to the radiation wavelength determines the reflection characteristics of
the radiation. When this ratio is low, the reflection can be regarded as
specular. Du et al. [79] applied the MCRT method to determine the solar
flux distribution insider the porous volumetric solar receiver. The inlet
distribution of solar radiation was simplified to be uniform. Furthermore,
Navalho and Pereira [15] investigated the solar radiation transport from
the solar dish concentrator to the porous volumetric solar receiver, and
the solar flux distribution were presented in Fig. 12. In order to simplify
the ray tracing process, some studies treated the porous media as a uni￾form participating material and applied Beer's law to determine the solar
radiation distribution [48,96].
3.1.2.2. Fluid flow and heat transfer in porous volumetric solar recei￾vers. The direct pore-scale numerical simulation method does not
introduce any empirical parameters and the detailed fluid flow and heat
transfer processes could be captured by solving the governing equations.
For the fluid flow process, the surface of the porous skeleton forms the
fluid channel which is usually set as non-slip boundary in the numerical
model. The inlet boundary condition of the receiver is usually set with
constant and uniform velocity or mass flow rate. For the flow state inside
Fig. 10. Procedure of porous media reconstruction based on the X-ray computed tomography technique.
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
8

the receiver, the turbulent model could be added according to the
simulation conditions. For example, the honeycomb porous volumetric
solar receiver has straight flow channels and the critical Reynolds num￾ber from laminar flow to turbulent flow is 2300 [49]. Moreover, Dybbs
and Edwards [97] conducted visualization studies for the packed spheres
and rods porous structures, and divided four flow regimes as follows:
Darcy flow (Red < 1), inertia flow (1-10<Red < 150), unsteady laminar
flow (150<Red < 300) and fully turbulent flow (Red > 300).
For the heat transfer process, the porous skeleton is irradiated by solar
radiation and exchanges heat to the heat transfer fluid. Due to the non￾uniform distribution and elevated temperature, the thermal radiation
transfer in the porous skeleton should also be considered. The inlet air
temperature is set to be constant and the solar flux calculated by the
MCRT method is treated as heat flux on the surface or energy source in
the porous skeleton. For example, Sanchez et al. [90], Cagnoli et al. [49]
and Zhu and Xuan [92] treated the solar flux as second-type boundary
condition on the surface of the porous skeleton. Ali et al. [91] extracted
the volume mesh and set solar radiation as the energy source to the en￾ergy governing equation of the porous media. For radiative heat transfer,
the heat transfer fluid (air) is a non-participating material and the radi￾ative loss and radiative heat exchange between porous skeletons should
be studied. The commonly used radiation models in porous volumetric
solar receivers are Surface-to-Surface (S2S) model [49,91] and Discrete
Ordinates (DO) method [82,83].
Based on the above direct pore-scale numerical method, Cagnoli et al.
[49] analyzed the influence of tilt angle, channel size, and inlet air ve￾locity on the optical and thermal performances of the honeycomb porous
volumetric solar receiver. The typical temperature field of the honey￾comb porous volumetric solar receiver was shown in Fig. 13(a). The
variation of tilt angle of incident solar radiation led to different solar flux
distributions in the channels but it has little effect on the thermal effi￾ciency. Higher inlet air velocity and larger channel size were beneficial
for improving the thermal efficiency. Zhu and Xuan [92] investigated the
packed bed porous volumetric solar receiver with different unit cells. The
MCRT method was applied to analyze the solar radiation penetration and
the influence of incident angle. Due to lower porosity and large absorp￾tivity of the porous material, the penetration depth was limited. The body
centered cubic packed bed had smaller porosity which enhanced the
convective heat transfer but increased the pressure resistance. The
thermal efficiency of this type of porous volumetric solar receivers was
relatively higher due to the lower temperature in the front surface of the
receiver. The temperature fields under different inlet velocities were
Fig. 11. Procedure of Monte Carlo ray tracing.
Fig. 12. Normalized solar irradiation heat flux distribution on the receiver (Reproduced with permission [15]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
9

presented in Fig. 13(b). Du et al. [79] utilized the X-ray CT scan recon￾struction method and built the real three-dimensional model of the
porous foam. The MCRT method was applied to calculate the solar flux
distribution inside the porous media which was then treated as the source
term to the energy conservation equation. By solving the governing
equations of fluid low and heat transfer, the detailed temperature field in
the porous volumetric solar receiver was obtained in Fig. 13(c).
Furthermore, based on the X-ray CT scan and image processing tech￾niques, the porous models with controllable geometrical parameters
were reconstructed by Du et al. [98]. The influence of geometrical pa￾rameters on the performance of the porous volumetric solar receiver was
studied, and the Nusselt number correlation was derived.
3.2. Volume averaging simulation method
Different from the direct pore-scale numerical simulation method, the
volume averaging simulation method does not consider the detailed
structure of the porous media. It views the porous zone as two continuous
solid phase and liquid phase regions, which represent the porous skeleton
and the fluid, respectively. The interaction between the porous media
and the fluid is introduced by effective properties and source terms in the
governing equations. The volume averaging simulation method requires
less computational resources and has been widely used to analyze and
optimize the porous volumetric solar receiver. The accuracy of the vol￾ume averaging simulation method is greatly influenced by the selection
of empirical parameters, and the determination of these parameters and
correlations are presented as follows.
3.2.1. Fluid flow in the porous media
The porous skeleton impedes the fluid flow and flow resistance
should be determined in the porous media. Darcy's law [99] is the
theoretical basis which links the pressure drop with the superficial ve￾locity by introducing permeability, as shown in Equation (1).
Δp
ΔL ¼ μ
K
U (1)
where p is the pressure, μ is the dynamic viscosity, K represents the
permeability of the porous media, and U is the superficial velocity.
Permeability reflects the capacity of porous media that allows the fluid to
pass through, and the larger value means that the fluid could more easily
flow in the porous media. Darcy's law is suitable for low Reynolds
number fluid flow, and the inertia force becomes evident with the in￾crease of flow velocity. Many equations have been proposed by consid￾ering the inertia effect based on Darcy's law, such as Darcy-Forchheimer
equation as shown in Equation (2) and Darcy-Brinkman equation [99].
Δp
ΔL ¼ μ
K
U  ρcf
ffiffiffiffi
K p U2 (2)
Ergun and Orning [100] considered the Poiseuille equation and
capillary flow and theoretically derived the pressure drop correlation of
the packed bed porous media. Based on the experimental data of various
fluids in different structures of the porous media, Ergun [101] deter￾mined the empirical parameters of the pressure drop equation, as shown
in Equation (3).
Δp
ΔL ¼ 150 ð1  εÞ
2
ε3
μU
D2
P
þ 1:75 ð1  εÞ
ε3
ρU2
DP
(3)
In the equation, ε and DP are porosity and effective particle diameter
of the porous media, respectively. This equation was derived for the
porous media with small porosity but many researchers still adopted it to
predict the pressure drop for the porous foam.
In order to characterize the pressure drop and calculate the perme￾ability, experimental measurement and direct pore-scale numerical
simulation method could be applied. Taking the research from Dietrich
[102] as an example, a typical experimental set-up was shown in Fig. 14,
which mainly includes a test sample, flow control devices, and data
acquisition devices. During the test, the flow velocity was controlled by
the blower and the pressure drop was measured by a sensitive manom￾eter. By adding a heating device, the fluid temperature in the set-up could
be precisely controlled, and the thermophysical properties could be
calculated. Based on the derived data, the relationship between pressure
drop and velocity could be established and the empirical parameters in
the correlation could be derived. Madani et al. [103] pointed out that the
inlet and outlet effects of the porous media influenced the pressure
measurement. It was suggested to arrange the pressure measuring device
inside the porous media along the fluid direction for precise
measurements.
In Section 3.1, it is noticed that the direct pore-scale numerical
method can obtain the detailed velocity field inside the porous media.
Therefore, this method can be used to capture the pressure drop and
velocity. Diani et al. [74] applied the X-ray CT reconstruction method
and built porous foam models with different pore densities. The fluid
flow of air inside the porous foams was simulated and the typical flow
field was shown in Fig. 15(a). Wu et al. [104] used the periodic unit cell
reconstruction method and built Kelvin models with different geomet￾rical parameters. The pressure drop of different porous models was
summarized in Fig. 15(b), and the relationship between pressure, ve￾locity, porosity, and thermophysical properties of air was established. In
the velocity range of 0.5-5 m/s, the correlation agreed well with the
experimental data. Similarly, Nie et al. [105] reconstructed the porous
models with the Laguerre-Voronoi tessellation, a pressure drop correla￾tion with a larger applicable range of pore density and porosity was built.
Although many studies have been conducted for the pressure drop of
the porous media, but different correlations deviate with each other and
a direct comparison is hard. The main reasons for such a problem are
summarized as follows: the measurement and data processing methods,
and the selection of characteristic lengths of the porous media are not
consistent, and the geometrical parameters of the porous media are not in
the same range. Firstly, the pressure is usually measured at the inlet and
outlet of the porous media. Considering that the thickness along the flow
Fig. 13. Temperature fields in porous volumetric solar receivers (a)Honeycomb (Reproduced with permission [49]. Copyright 2017, Elsevier); (b)Packed bed
(Reproduced with permission [92]. Copyright 2017, Elsevier); (c)Foam (Reproduced with permission [79]. Copyright 2017, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
10

direction of the porous media is different in these studies, it is difficult to
evaluate the difference in measurements caused by the inlet and outlet
effects. Secondly, Kumar and Topin [106] summarized many studies and
pointed out that correlating the experimental data by Darcy-Forchheimer
equation without distinguishing the flow regime causes errors in the
calculation of empirical parameters. The appropriate way to fit the
experimental data is to find the seepage flow regime at first. Finally, the
characteristic lengths of the porous media were selected differently in the
studies. The commonly selected characteristic lengths include pore
diameter, hydraulic diameter, and square root of permeability, which
makes the direct comparison between different correlations more diffi￾cult. It should be noted that the problem of characteristic length selection
also exists for the correlations of convective heat transfer coefficients.
The proposed pressure drop correlations were thoroughly summarized in
Refs. [106,107], and the correlations used for porous volumetric solar
receivers are presented in Table 1.
From Tables 1 and it is seen that the Ergun equation was also used for
the porous volumetric solar receiver despite that it was derived for the
porous media with small porosity. In order to retain the form of the Ergun
equation, Lacroix et al. [121] modified it for the porous foam by
substituting the particle diameter in the original equation. The modified
equation was suitable for the porosity in the range of 0.75-0.92, which
agreed well with the experimental data when the velocity was under 6
m/s. Dietrich et al. [102] conducted experiments for the ceramic porous
samples with different pore densities and porosities. The derived pres￾sure drop correlation was compared with more than 2500 data in ref￾erences and derivation was within 40% [123]. The most widely used
pressure drop correlation for the porous volumetric solar receiver was
proposed by Wu et al. [104]. The Kelvin structures with different
geometrical parameters were built, and the direct pore-scale numerical
simulation method was applied. One good advantage for Wu's equation
was the large applicable range of porosity and the Reynolds number.
3.2.2. Heat transfer in the porous media
In order to obtain the heat transfer characteristics in the porous
media, both the local thermal equilibrium (LTE) model and the local
thermal non-equilibrium (LTNE) model can be applied. The main dif￾ference between these two models is whether the temperature difference
between the porous media and the heat transfer fluid exists or not.
Considering for the large difference in thermal conductivity of air and
porous media, the LTNE model has been widely accepted [124,125]. This
model solves the energy conservations equations in both the porous
media and the heat transfer fluid regions, and uses source terms to
represent the energy exchange between the two regions.
3.2.2.1. Solar radiation transport in porous volumetric solar receivers. The
process of solar radiation transport and the solar energy coupling method
are summarized in Fig. 16. The solar radiation transport before entering
the porous volumetric solar receiver can be calculated by the MCRT
method, which has been introduced in the above section. For simplicity,
some studies adopted uniform or Gaussian distribution of the incident
solar radiation at the inlet of the porous volumetric solar receiver [112,
115,117,118,126,127].
When the solar radiation distribution in the aperture of the solar
Fig. 14. Schematic of the experimental set-up for pressure drop measurements (Reproduced with permission [102]. Copyright 2009, Elsevier).
Fig. 15. Fluid flow and pressure drop characteristics based on the direct pore-scale numerical simulation (a)Flow field (Reproduced with permission [74]. Copyright
2015, Elsevier); (b)Pressure drop characteristic (Reproduced with permission [104]. Copyright 2010, Elsevier).
Table 1
Pressure drop correlations of porous volumetric solar receivers.
Authors Correlation Application Citing
Ergun
[101]
Δp
ΔL ¼ 150 ð1  εÞ
2
ε3
μU
D2
P
þ
1:75 ð1  εÞ
ε3
ρU2
DP
Derived for the packed
porous media with low
porosity
[108–111]
Wu et al.
[104]
Δp
ΔL ¼ ð1039  1002εÞ
d2
c
μU þ
0:5138ε5:739
dc
ρU2
10<Re<400
0.66<ε<0.93
[112–120]
Lacroix
et al.
[121]
Δp
ΔL ¼ 150 ð1  εÞ
2
ε3
μU
d2
P
þ
1:75 ð1  εÞ
ε3
ρU2
dP
Ergun equation with
modified characteristic
length
[122]
Dietrich
et al.
[102]
Δp
ΔL ¼ 110 μ
ε  d2
h
U þ
1:45 ρ
ε2  dh
U2
10<Re<3900 [18]
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
11

receiver is determined, the solar radiation transport inside the porous
media should be analyzed. Some studies considered that the optical
thickness of the porous media is large, and the solar radiation absorption
occurs within a short distance from the front surface of the receiver.
Therefore, solar radiation is simplified as the heat flux boundary condi￾tion for the energy conservation equation or radiative transfer equation
[108,110,111,113]. On the other hand, some researchers thought that it
was necessary to consider the solar radiation penetration process. The
MCRT method and the ideal exponential decay based on Beer's law could
be applied, and the solar energy inside the porous volumetric solar
receiver were treated as a source term to the energy conservation equa￾tion or radiative transfer equation [18,109,112,114,115,117,119,120,
126].
Different from the implementation of MCRT in the direct pore-scale
numerical simulation method, the MCRT method in the volume aver￾aging simulation method does not consider the real interaction between
the porous skeleton and photon. The photon propagation length and
scattering models are implemented with random processes which
correspond to the radiative properties of the porous media and the heat
transfer fluid. In order to determine the propagation length Δs of the
photon between two collisions, the extinction coefficient β and the
random number ξ are used to establish the relationship as Δs¼-lnξ/β. The
extinction coefficient could be measured by a spectrometer or calculated
by the direct pore-scale numerical simulation. One typical correlation for
the extinction coefficient of the porous media is shown in Equation (4).
Based on the geometric optics approximation [128] and the experimental
data by Hendricks and Howell [129], the constant coefficient in Equation
(4) is 3 and 4.8, respectively.
β ¼ Cð1  εÞ
dp
(4)
The scattering process inside the porous media is determined by the
scattering phase function, which gives the method to calculate the
azimuthal angle. Taking the Henyey-Greenstein phase function as an
example, the equation for the azimuthal angle with anisotropic scattering
is given by Equation (5). The range for asymmetry factor g is 1~1, and
value of 0 means the isotropic scattering and Equation (6) should be used
[130]. Chen et al. [131] and Qiu et al. [132] treated the porous volu￾metric solar receiver as the uniform scattering material and investigated
the solar radiation transport process and the influence of geometrical
parameters on the solar flux distribution. Barreto et al. [133] solved the
inverse problem with experimental data of hemispherical diffuse reflec￾tance, and it was found that that the solar radiation scattering in the SiC
ceramic foams is slightly backwards and the best value of asymmetry
factor was 0.25. The detailed photon transport inside the porous media
could refer to Refs. [134,135].
cos θ ¼ 1
2g
(
1 þ g2 
 1  g2
1  g þ 2gξ
2
)
(5)
cos θ ¼ 2ξ  1 (6)
Chen et al. [116] compared the thermal performances of the porous
volumetric solar receiver when treating the solar radiation as the heat
flux boundary condition or energy source term. The volumetric absorp￾tion was ignored when using heat flux boundary condition which leads to
a higher surface temperature and larger thermal radiative losses. It was
also shown that the temperature distribution was slightly influenced by
the incident angle of the solar radiation, and the largest deviation in
temperature was 3.4%.
3.2.2.2. Coupled heat transfer in porous volumetric solar receivers
3.2.2.2.1. Heat conduction. According to the LTNE model, the effec￾tive thermal conductivities of the porous media and the heat transfer
fluid are necessary for simulating the heat conduction. The effective
thermal conductivities of packed beds and porous foams have been
widely investigated and the commonly used methods include asymptotic
models, experimental measurements, theoretical models and direct pore￾scale numerical simulation.
Based on the one dimensional heat conduction assumption, the most
commonly used parallel and series models of thermal conductivities are
present in Equation (7) and Equation (8), which show the lower and
upper bounds for the thermal conductivity of the porous media. In the
parallel model, the contribution of the porous media and the heat transfer
fluid can be easily separated and it has been adopted in many studies of
porous volumetric solar receivers. Besides, many other asymptotic
models were proposed such as the Maxwell-Eucken model and the Miller
model [136]. The asymptotic models not only give the estimation of
upper and lower bounds but also provide ideas for the construction of
effective thermal conductivity correlations. For example, Calmidi and
Mahajan [137] modified the Equation (7) and introduced two co￾efficients for better fitting with the experimental data. Dul'nev and Zar￾ichnyak as well as Chaudhary and Bhandari combined the parallel and
series models linearly and by production [136].
λk ¼ ελf þð1  εÞλs (7)
λ? ¼
 ε
λf
þ
1  ε
λs
1
(8)
Secondly, experimental measurements can give an accurate value of
the effective thermal conductivity based on Fourier's law. Fig. 17 presents
the typical experimental set-up for the effective thermal conductivity
measurement in the study of Paek et al. [138]. The experimental set-ups
used the water bath to generate the temperature difference on the two
sides of the porous media, and uses thermocouples to measure the tem￾peratures at different positions in the test sections. In order to acquire the
heat flux passes through the porous media, Calmidi and Mahajan [137]
assumed that the heat loss could be neglect due to the thermal insulation
material and all the heat generated by the electric heating flowed
through the porous media. Bhattacharya et al. [139] further measured
Fig. 16. Solar radiation transfer and solar energy coupling method.
Fig. 17. Schematic of experimental set-ups for effective thermal conductivity
measurements of Paek et al. (Reproduced with permission [138]. Copyright
2000, Springer Nature).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
12

the temperature distribution inside the thermal insulation material and
estimated the heat loss to the environment. Paek et al. [138] and
Schmierer et al. [140] arranged a stainless steel plate with known ther￾mal conductivity and the porous sample in series. Based on the
assumption of heat flux continuity, the temperatures on the two sides of
the stainless steel plate could be used to calculate the heat flux flowing
through the porous media. It should be mentioned that the thermal
contact resistance influences the experimental measurement due to the
high porosity and irregular structure of the porous media. Sadeghi et al.
[141] measured the effective thermal conductivity of porous samples
with different thicknesses, and the thermal contact resistance could be
determined by assuming that it is constant. Fiedler et al. [142] further
pointed out that the thermal contact resistance could change under
different experimental conditions. It could be accurately calculated by
analyzing the experimental data with numerical simulation. Moreover,
Vicente et al. [143] derived the effective thermal conductivity by
capturing the temperature response of the porous media to the radiative
heat flux by a thermal imaging camera. Some studies directly measured
the effective thermal conductivity by the transient plane source tech￾nique with a hot disk [144–146].
Thirdly, the theoretical models simplify the porous media to the ar￾rays of periodic unit cells, such as hexagons in the two-dimensional space
and the Kelvin structure in the three-dimensional space. The idealized
porous structures could be divided into multiple zones along the heat flux
direction and the theory of thermal resistance could be applied to
calculate the effective thermal conductivity. Calmidi and Mahajan [137]
simplified the porous media with hexagonal periodic units and a square
block structure was added at the vertices of the hexagon to reflect the
larger thickness in the connection of the porous skeleton. The represen￾tative unit in the hexagonal structure was extracted and the porous
structure was divided into multiple layers along the heat flux direction. In
each layer, the porous skeleton was in parallel with the heat transfer
fluid, and the effective thermal conductivity was calculated by Equation
(7). The effective thermal conductivity of the entire porous media was
the serial combination of multiple layers which was calculated with
Equation (8). Finally, the calculated effective thermal conductivity was
compared with experimental data to determine the value of undeter￾mined constants in the correlation. Based on this study, some researchers
further modified the shape of the block in the skeleton intersection [136]
which was not presented in detail.
Lastly, the direct pore-scale numerical simulation is an effective
method to calculate the effective thermal conductivity of the porous
media because the temperature field inside the porous media can be
easily obtained. Many studies investigated the effective thermal con￾ductivity of the porous media with different geometries [57,105,147].
Despite that many correlations for the effective thermal conductivity
have been established, there still exist certain limitations. Kumar and
Topin [148] as well as Dietrich et al. [149]pointed out that the thermal
conductivity of the porous skeleton was different from the intrinsic
thermal conductivity of the material that make up the porous media. Due
to different processing techniques and impurities, deviations exist be￾tween the thermophysical properties of the framework and the intrinsic
thermophysical properties of the material. Moreover, Ranut [136] found
that using a detailed and complex structure of the porous medium model
does not guarantee a more accurate prediction of the equivalent thermal
conductivity. Introducing the undetermined constants in the correlation
was beneficial for the curve fitting with the experimental data. Finally,
some correlations have a mutual term of both the heat transfer fluid and
porous media. When it is hard to distinguish the contribution of the
porous media and the heat transfer fluid to the thermal conductivity,
such correlations can not be applied for the LTNE model.
Based on the above analysis, the studies for porous volumetric solar
receivers generally used the parallel model or the Schuetz-Glicksman
correlation in the LTNE model [150], which are presented in Table 2.
It should be noted that the original Schuetz-Glicksman correlation was
proposed for the porous media with large porosity and the contribution
of the heat transfer fluid to the thermal conductivity was not considered
[151].
3.2.2.2.2. Convective heat transfer. In the volume averaging simula￾tion method, the convective heat transfer between the porous media and
the heat transfer fluid is set as a source term in the energy conservation
equations. Therefore, accurate evaluation of the convective heat transfer
coefficient has become the key to investigate the convective heat transfer
process in the porous media. The commonly used methods include the
single blow method and the direct pore-scale numerical simulation
method.
The basic principle of the single blow method is to measure the
temperature variation of the fluid when it flows through the porous
media with different temperatures, and the inverse problem is solved
based on experimental data and numerical simulation. In the experi￾ments, the inlet and outlet fluid temperatures are monitored and the
experimental process can be either heating or cooling the fluid. An
experimental set-up for the porous media cooling the high temperature
fluid is presented in Fig. 18(a). In the first stage of the experiment, the
heat transfer fluid passed through the heating device and the test section.
The experimental system reached a steady state and the temperature of
the porous media and the heat transfer fluid was no longer changed. In
the second stage, the high temperature porous sample was quickly
replaced by un unheated porous sample. Due to the temperature differ￾ence, the cooling process of the heat transfer fluid could be monitored by
thermocouples at the outlet. Based on the experimental conditions, the
transient LTNE model of the porous media with the heat transfer fluid
was established, and the boundary conditions as well as the thermo￾physical properties maintained the same with the experiment. By
adjusting the value of convective heat transfer coefficient in the nu￾merical model, the difference between the numerical simulation results
and the experimental data was gradually reduced and finally the
convective heat transfer coefficient was obtained.
The implementations of the single blow method are different in the
studies. In order to adjust the temperature of the heat transfer fluid, many
researchers adopted electric heating devices. But Giani et al. [154] mixed
hydrogen into the fluid, and the hydrogen reacted with the catalyst to
heat the fluid. Dietrich [153] designed the high temperature and low
temperature flow paths, which could be switched to change the tem￾perature of the fluid that passed through the porous media, as shown in
Fig. 18(b). A similar two flow paths design was also used by Lu et al.
[155]. Besides, many studies monitored both inlet and outlet tempera￾tures of the heat transfer fluid and did not maintain the constant tem￾perature inlet boundary condition [156–158]. In the numerical models,
the measured fluid temperature in the inlet was set as the time-dependent
boundary condition, and the calculated outlet temperature was used for
the comparison with experimental data. The single blow method is a
transient measurement method, and some researchers also applied
steady methods to evaluate the convective heat transfer coefficient.
Ichimiya [159] utilized the side wall to heat the porous sample and let it
heat the low temperature heat transfer fluid. The temperature of the side
wall and the fluid could be measured which were then used to calculate
the convective heat transfer coefficient at the wall. This parameter was
selected as the indicator in the inverse problem.
On the other hand, the direct pore-scale numerical simulation method
has been widely used to investigate the convective heat transfer in the
porous media. Iasiello et al. [71] compared the convective heat transfer
coefficient of real porous foams with the Kelvin structure. When the two
porous models had the similar porosity, cell diameter, and strut
Table 2
Effective thermal conductivity correlations of porous volumetric solar receivers.
Models λf,eff λs,eff Citing
Parallel model ε⋅λf (1-ε)⋅λs [108,110,114]
Schuetz-Glicksman correlation [150] ε⋅λf (1-ε)⋅λs/
3
[18,111–113,
115–120]
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
13

thickness, the Kelvin structure had a larger volumetric convective heat
transfer coefficient due to the larger specific surface area. Meinicke et al.
[160] further compared the porous foam, the Kelvin structure, the
Weaire-Phelan structure, the simple cube periodic structure. The porous
foam had more tortuous flow channels which led to a larger convective
heat transfer coefficient. It should be pointed out that the boundary
conditions used in the direct pore-scale numerical simulations were
different. Some studies [69,75,161] used the constant temperature
boundary condition on the surface of the porous media, while other
studies [71,74] adopted the constant heat flux boundary condition.
Ranut et al. [72] compared the simulation results under these two
boundary conditions and found that the constant heat flux boundary led
to larger convective heat transfer coefficient under the same Reynolds
number. Du et al. [162] further compared these two boundary conditions
with the non-uniform solar flux distribution. It was shown that the
calculated Nusselt number was a good approximation to that of the
porous volumetric solar receiver when utilizing the constant temperature
boundary condition.
Based on the above research methods, a large number of correlations
of the convective heat transfer coefficients of the porous media have been
proposed. However, differences in the correlation forms and applicable
ranges still exist. Firstly, most studies adopted the correlation form as
Nu¼f(Re,Pr), and some studies introduced the influence of porosity [52,
152,156] and the ratio of thickness of the porous media and the pore size
[152,163]. Secondly, as stated above, the selection of the characteristic
length was not consistent which makes it difficult for direct comparison.
Lastly, the LTNE model should be solved when applying single-blow
method. The selection of other empirical parameters such as perme￾ability and effective thermal conductivity influence the calculation of the
convective heat transfer coefficient. Table 3 summarized the convective
heat transfer coefficient correlations of porous volumetric solar receivers.
Wu et al. [52] and Du et al. [98] applied the direct pore-scale nu￾merical simulation method and obtained the convective heat transfer
coefficient for the porous foam. Dietrich et al. [153] conducted a single
blow experiment for the porous foams and correlated the convective heat
transfer coefficient with hydraulic diameter. The correlations of Hwang
Fig. 18. Schematics of experimental setups of convective heat transfer coefficient measurements (a) Younis and Viskanta (Reproduced with permission [152].
Copyright 1993, Elsevier); (b)Dietrich (Reproduced with permission [153]. Copyright 2013, Elsevier).
Table 3
Convective heat transfer coefficient correlations of porous volumetric solar receivers.
Author Correlation Notes Citing
Wu et al. [52] h ¼ λfð32:504ε0:38  109:94ε1:38 þ 166:65ε2:38  86:98ε3:38ÞRe0:438
c =d2
c Porous foam
70<Rec<800
0.66<ε<0.93
[112–120]
Du et al. [98] Nu ¼ 2:785 þ 1:261  ε0:8859  Re0:5237
d Porous foam
3<Red<233
0.74<ε<0.89
[164,165]
Hwang et al. [166]
h ¼
8
>>><
>>>:
0:004
dvoid
dpar 0:35 kf
dpar
Pr0:33Re1:35
par ; Repar  75
1:064 kf
dpar
Pr0:33Re0:59
par ; Repar  300
Packed bed
Interpolation of h when 75<Repar<300
[109,110]
Wakao et al. [167] h ¼ λfð2 þ 1:1Pr1=3Re0:6Þ=dpar Packed bed 15<Repar<8500 [111]
Dietrich et al. [153] h ¼ λfð0:57  CRe  Cgeo  Re2=3
h Pr1=3Þ=dh Porous foam
60<Reh<1000
0.66<ε<0.93
[18]
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
14

et al. [166] and Wakao et al. [167] were initially for the packed bed
porous media but not for the porous volumetric solar receiver.
3.2.2.2.3. Radiative heat transfer. The radiative heat transfer be￾comes evident in solar receivers as the temperature goes higher. Because
it is difficult to completely solve the radiation transfer equation, the
simplifications should be made based on the radiative properties of the
porous media and the heat transfer fluid. The commonly used methods
include Rosseland approximation and P1 model [168].
The porous volumetric solar receiver is generally considered as the
optically thick semi-transparent medium, and the transmission distance
of radiation inside it is relatively short. Therefore, the radiative heat
exchange usually depends on the state of the adjacent area, and the
radiative heat transfer tend to be the same as the heat conduction. Based
on this characteristic, the Rosseland approximation is applied, the radi￾ation transfer equation can be simplified, and the radiative heat flux is
calculated by Equation (9) [168].
qr ¼ 16n2σT3
s
3β 
dTs
dx ¼λr 
dTs
dx (9)
where n is the refractive index, σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant which
equals 5.67610-5 W/(m2
⋅K4
), and λr stands for the equivalent radiative
conductivity. Based on the Rosseland approximation, the influence of
radiative heat transfer can be added to the heat conduction term in the
energy conservation equation.
Some studies have pointed out that the application of the Rosseland
approximation causes relatively large errors at the boundary [113].
Therefore, the P1 model is applied which is a simplification of PN model.
The P1 model considers the scattering process and the radiation transfer
equation is shown by Equation (10) [112].
r   1
3ða þ σsÞ
rG

¼ a

4σT4
s  G

þ S (10)
In this equation, a and σs are the absorption and scattering co￾efficients, respectively. The radiative heat flux added to the energy
conservation equation can be calculated by Equation (11).
r  qr ¼ a

4σT4
s  G
 (11)
Except the extinction coefficient, the scattering coefficient is neces￾sary for the calculation. Based on the geometric optics, the absorption
and scattering coefficients depend on the geometrical parameters of the
porous media and the emissivity, which are shown in Equation (12) and
Equation (13) [112].
a ¼ 1:5εeð1  εÞ
	
dp (12)
σs ¼ 1:5ð2  εeÞð1  εÞ
	
dp (13)
It should be noted that the Equation (10) is only valid for the uniform
scattering, and an anisotropic phase function coefficient can be further
considered [169]. Moreover, other radiation models such as the DO
model could also be used for porous volumetric solar receivers.
Mey et al. [113] compared the thermal performances of porous
volumetric solar receivers calculated by the Rosseland approximation,
the P1 model, and the two-flux approximation. When applying the Ros￾seland approximation, the solar flux was added as the heat flux boundary
condition in the energy conservation equation. While in the P1 model, the
solar flux was treated as the heat flux boundary condition to the radiation
transfer equation. It was found that the Rosseland approximation led to a
high temperature at the inlet of the receiver but the temperature inside
the receiver and at the outlet were close to that calculated by the two-flux
approximation. Wang et al. [114] compared the Rosseland approxima￾tion and the modified P1 model for porous volumetric solar receivers.
When treating solar energy as the energy source term in the energy
conservation equation, the Rosseland approximation and the modified P1
model gave similar simulation results and the largest deviation was
4.97%. Zaversky et al. [18] compared the Rosseland approximation and
the DO model and found that the Rosseland approximation was better
when treating solar energy as the source term in the energy conservation
equation. Therefore, the treatment of solar energy and the selection of
radiation models both influence the calculation of radiation heat transfer.
Based on the volume averaging simulation method, a large number of
studies have carried out to investigate the influence of geometrical pa￾rameters and operating conditions on the thermal performance of porous
volumetric solar receivers. Wang et al. [114], Chen et al. [116] and
Barreto et al. [119] investigated the solar radiation transport in the he￾liostat field coupled with the fluid flow and heat transfer processes inside
porous volumetric solar receivers. Wu and Wang [170] as well as Wang
et al. [171] established transient heat transfer models for porous volu￾metric solar receivers and analyzed the response time of the receivers
under the transient heat flux boundaries with different thermophysical
properties. Du et al. [127] coupled the genetic algorithm and the volume
averaging simulation method which served as an efficient tool to opti￾mize the geometrical parameters and operating conditions of porous
volumetric solar receivers.
4. Advances in volumetric absorption enhancement
Based on above experimental and numerical methods, studies have
been carried out for the performance optimization of porous volumetric
solar receivers. The volumetric absorption enhancement and thermal
efficient improvement of receivers could be realized by geometrical
parameter optimization and spectrally selective absorption.
4.1. Geometrical parameter optimization
The porous media prepared by conventional processing technologies
usually have a relatively uniform pore structures, and therefore have
relatively uniform optical and radiative properties as well as uniform
fluid flow and heat transfer characteristics. However, the energy transfer
in porous volumetric solar receivers is non-uniform. For example, the
penetration depth of solar radiation is limited due to the larger extinction
coefficient of the porous media. The absorption of solar radiation occurs
at the front of the receiver, which is contrary to the concept of volumetric
absorption by the porous media. Secondly, the incident solar radiation
distribution is non-uniform due to the concentrating process in the he￾liostat field. The uniform heat transfer capability of the porous media
does not match up with the non-uniform solar energy, which leads to
local overheating and deterioration in thermal efficiency. Therefore, the
concept of functionally graded material is used in the design of porous
volumetric solar receiver.
Multi-cavity volumetric receiver [42] was an earlier attempt that
adjusted the local geometrical parameters to improve the performance of
porous volumetric solar receivers. This receiver was built by horizontal
foils and side-bars, which formed cavities to absorb solar radiation. In
order to reduce the front surface area, a staggered layout of the front was
proposed as shown in Fig. 19(a). However, the experimental studies did
not indicate the performance improvement by the staggered design as
compared with the uniform structure. Fend et al.2 combined the porous
materials with different pore densities which had a larger pore density in
the front as presented in Fig. 19(b). The smaller pore size (80 PPI) of the
porous media could efficiently absorb the solar radiation while
enhancing the convective heat transfer. The larger pore size (20 PPI) in
the rear was beneficial for reducing the flow resistance. The double-layer
design improved the thermal efficiency by 10%, as compared to the
uniform porous media with a 20 PPI. Since then, the porous volumetric
solar receivers with double, triple or multilayer structure have been
extensively studied. Roldan et al. [126] and Chen et al. [115] established
the numerical model for the triple-layer and double-layer porous volu￾metric solar receivers, respectively. Both studies revealed that the
receiver with decreasing porosity distribution could improve the overall
thermal efficiency, which outperforms the traditional uniform porous
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
15

receivers with porosity of 0.7-0.9. The larger porosity in the front could
increase the penetration depth of solar radiation, reduce the surface
temperature, and limit the thermal radiative loss. Chen et al. further
investigated the influence of thickness ratio of the two layers on the
outlet temperature of the receiver. It is shown that the improvement in
thermal efficiency disappeared when the thickness of the front layer
reached a certain value. When the thickness of the front layer was too
small, the volumetric absorption of t solar radiation was weakened. The
optimized thickness ratio for the double-layer porous volumetric solar
receiver was 3:7. Avila-Marin et al. [172,173] and Zaversky et al. [18]
conducted experimental studies for the triple-layer wire mesh and silicon
carbide foam porous volumetric solar receivers, as presented in
Fig. 19(c). Avila-Marin et al. found that the optimized double-layer
receiver had a large front porosity and a large specific surface area in
the rear. Besides, the triple-layer receiver could not further improve the
thermal performance as compared with the optimized double-layer
receiver. However, in the experiment of Zaversky et al., no evident
improvement was observed by the double-layer or triple-layer designs. It
was concluded that a careful selection of the single-layer configuration
was sufficient to optimize the performance of the receiver. Based on the
developed numerical model, the optimized thickness ratio calculated by
Zaversky et al. was also 3:7, which was in agreement with the result of
Chen et al. [115].
Furthermore, the porous volumetric solar receivers with multilayers
and gradually-varied structures have also been proposed. Luque et al.
[175] designed the hierarchically-layered fractal-like porous volumetric
solar receivers based on additive manufacturing techniques as shown in
Fig. 19(d). The results showed that the volumetric effect could be obtained
but the thermal efficiency was relatively low. Capuano et al. [176] also
applied additive manufacturing techniques and fabricated the porous
media having a pin zone with gradually changed structures, as shown in
Fig. 19(e). Compared with HiTRec-II with uniform honeycomb structure,
the thermal performance was improved while the volumetric effect was
obtained. Du et al. [165] developed a replica method with the multilayer
recoating technique, and the silicon carbide porous ceramic with
linear-changed geometrical parameters was fabricated as presented in
Fig. 19(f). The experimental study showed that the thermal efficiency
could be improved by 1.46% with the gradually-varied design, compared
with the best uniform porous structure with an average porosity of 0.52.
Based on the 3D printing and replica method, the uniform and gradual cell
size porous receivers with different periodic cellular structures were
fabricated and tested by Avila-Marin et al. [177], as shown in Fig. 19(g).
The experimental results presented that Voronoi porous receiver with
gradually increasing cell size exhibited better thermal performance due to
lower solid temperature. Moreover, 3D printing technique has also been
adopted by different researchers for the fabrication of porous receivers
with graded pore geometries and complex lattice structures [178,179].
On the other hand, some studies focused on the porous volumetric
solar receivers with radial graded structures. The radial graded porous
media can improve the thermal performance of the receivers by adjusting
the air mass flow distribution under non-uniform solar radiation. Roldan
et al. [126] designed the porous volumetric solar receivers with
decreasing or increasing porosity distribution and analyzed the perfor￾mance with the LTE model. Arranging the porous structure with large
porosity at the center of the receiver was beneficial to increase the
average outlet temperature, but the temperature gradient of the receiver
also increased. Chen et al. [117] proposed a porous volumetric solar
receiver with composite structures. A small zone in the inlet near-wall
region was arranged with the porous media having smaller porosity
and pore size. The increased flow resistance compelled the fluid to move
into the center region with a higher solar flux, and the solid temperature
gradient in the front could be reduced. Based on the X-ray CT recon￾struction and 3D printing techniques, Du et al. [164] experimentally
investigated the fluid flow and heat transfer performances of the radially
graded porous volumetric solar receiver, as shown in Fig. 20. The results
showed that the thermal efficiency was relatively improved by 4.1%
while the flow resistance decreased relatively by 8.6%, compared with
the optimized uniform porous volumetric solar receiver with 20 PPI. By
utilizing the volume averaging simulation method, the flow and tem￾perature fields inside the porous volumetric solar receivers were visual￾ized as illustrated in Fig. 21. It was found that the local overheating
existed in the uniform porous volumetric solar receivers due to the fact
that the air viscosity increases as the temperature goes higher. The
smaller porosity at the center of the radially graded porous volumetric
solar receiver decreased the flow resistance at the high temperature re￾gion, which led to more heat transfer fluid to absorb the concentrated
solar radiation.
4.2. Spectrally selective absorption
From the viewpoint of energy balance, the key to improve the
receiver thermal efficiency is to increase the solar radiation absorption
and reduce energy losses. The thermal radiative loss at the front of the
receivers becomes the major energy loss under high temperature oper￾ation condition. Therefore, many researchers tried to adjust the radiative
properties of the materials and structure in order to increase the ab￾sorptivity in the solar spectrum while reducing the emissivity in the
infrared spectrum. The commonly investigated spectrally selective
Fig. 19. Porous volumetric solar receivers with varying geometries along the axis (a)Multi-cavity (Reproduced with permission [42]. Copyright 1993, Elsevier); (b)
Fend et al. (Adapted with permission [174]. Copyright 2004, Elsevier); (c) Avila-Marin et al. (Reproduced with permission [172]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier); (d)Luque
et al. (Adapted with permission [175]. Copyright 2018, Elsevier); (e)Capuano et al. (Reproduced with permission [176]. Copyright 2017, Elsevier); (f)Du et al.
(Reproduced with permission [165]. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature); (g)Avila-Marin et al. (Reproduced with permission [177]. Copyright 2022, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
16

materials include intrinsic materials, semiconductor-metal tandems,
multilayer structures, cermets, surface texturing, and photonic crystals
based designs [180]. Considering for the high working temperature in
the CSP system, the spectrally selective receiver mainly focuses on the
application of intrinsic materials or multilayer structures.
Olalde et al. [181] designed two spectrally selective porous volu￾metric solar receivers that both had gradually-varied radiative proper￾ties. One receiver was a honeycomb structure with transparent matrix,
and the absorptivity was gradually increased by controlling the deposit
thickness of chemical vapor deposition. The other receiver was con￾structed by a packed bed which was a mixed composition of particles
with different radiative properties. The front layer was designed to be
transparent in the solar spectrum while the absorptivity was progres￾sively increased by adding more absorptive particles in the rear. The
thermal radiative loss was limited because the transparent matrix had a
larger absorptivity in the infrared spectrum. Pitz-Paal et al. [182] pro￾posed a double-layer porous volumetric solar receiver with quartz glass
in the front of the SiSiC ceramic as shown in Fig. 22(a). The quartz glass
was transparent to solar radiation and the SiSiC ceramic can volumetri￾cally absorbed solar energy. The thermal radiation emitted by the high
temperature ceramic was reabsorbed by the quartz glass because it could
effectively absorb the infrared emission. It was demonstrated that the
thermal efficiency could be improved from 68.5% to 75.0% using this
double-layer design when the outlet air temperature reached above 900
C.
Similarly, Menigault et al. [183] also developed double-layer spec￾trally selective porous volumetric solar receivers. The solar radiation
absorption layer was placed in the rear which was composed of SiC
particles as shown in Fig. 22(b). The front layer consisted of glass spheres
or pure silica honeycomb structures, which can absorb the thermal
emission from the SiC particles. For the receiver with glass spheres, the
outlet air temperature was lower than 500 C due to the temperature
limitation of glass. However, by fitting the experimental data from the
high temperature zone, it was shown that the double-layer receiver
outperformed when the outlet air temperature reached above 600 C. For
the double-layer receiver with silica honeycomb structures, the outlet air
temperature can achieve 600 C, and the thermal efficiency was
improved from 71% to 76%, compared with the pure SiC porous volu￾metric solar receiver. Sedighi et al. [184] further designed and investi￾gated the packed bed volumetric solar receiver with spheres of different
transmittance. In order to improve the penetration depth and achieve the
volumetric effect, the quartz spheres with high transmittance were
installed in the front of the receiver. Meanwhile, the ceramic spheres
which have large absorptance were located in the rear of the receiver to
prevent the transmission loss. The outlet temperature of the variable
transmittance quartz packed bed was significantly increased compared
with the quartz and ceramic packed beds, and a high index of volumetric
effect of 1.45 was achieved.
Moreover, investigations on the application of intrinsic spectrally
selective materials for porous volumetric solar receivers have been car￾ried out. Zhu and Xuan [185] numerically investigated a porous volu￾metric porous solar receiver with a MoSi2-Si3N4 spectrally selective
coating. This coating was compared with the ideal coating material with
a cut-off wavelength of 2 μm. Compared with the regular receivers, the
receivers with the MoSi2-Si3N4 coating and the ideal coating could
improve the thermal efficiency by 1.2% and 2.9%, respectively. Some
studies focused on the radiative properties of ultra-high temperature
ceramics such as HfB2 and TaC [186,187], but few studies applied these
ceramics to porous volumetric solar receivers and investigated the per￾formance improvement. Rousseau et al. [188] utilized the pore-scale
reconstruction and ray tracing methods to analyzed the emissivity of
the porous skeleton with TaC, ZrC, and ZrB2 coatings. Compared with SiC
which has a large emissivity in the infrared spectrum, the ZrB2 coating
can largely achieve the spectrally selective absorption, and the emissivity
in the infrared spectrum and absorptivity in the solar spectrum were 0.31
and 0.81, respectively. Recently, Du et al. [189] proposed the porous
volumetric solar receiver based on molten salt as a heat transfer fluid, and
the Hitec and air receivers were compared based on the direct pore-scale
numerical simulation method. By utilizing the intrinsic spectrally selec￾tive absorptivity, the molten salt could be regarded as the transparent
window to solar radiation which absorbs the thermal radiation emitted
by the porous structure. The results showed that the thermal efficiency of
the Hitec porous volumetric solar receiver could be improved by 9.6% at
receiver's outlet temperature of 1000 K as compared with the air porous
volumetric solar receiver.
5. Conclusions and outlooks
Since the 1980s, the experimental studies have accumulated experi￾ence in material selection, structural design, and system operation of
porous volumetric solar receivers. The ceramic materials have become a
better choice due to the higher upper temperature limit and oxidation
resistance. Silicon carbide has been widely used due to their good ab￾sorption performance in the solar spectrum and high temperature resis￾tance characteristics. For the atmospheric porous volumetric solar
receiver, Solar Tower Jülich demonstrated the mature design which
utilized the modular design concept and air return system. Such design
could be easily scale-up and the overall thermal efficiency was high. For
the pressurized porous volumetric solar receiver, problems exist for the
secondary concentrator and transparent window. The non-uniform and
Fig. 20. Radially graded porous media fabricated by 3D printing (Adapted with
permission [164]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier).
Fig. 21. Temperature distribution in the porous volumetric solar receiver (a)
Uniform porous media; (b)Radial graded porous media (Adapted with permis￾sion [164]. Copyright 2020, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
17

high temperature working condition severely influence the thermal ef￾ficiency and long-term usage of the entire system. Hence, it is crucial to
test the long-term stability of the receiver, and establish a large-scale CSP
system based on a porous volumetric solar receiver to assess its
compatibility with various power cycles.
Due to the complex structure of the porous media, limited experi￾mental measurement conditions, and high experimental costs, numerical
simulation methods have become an important means for analyzing the
fluid flow and heat transfer performance of porous volumetric solar re￾ceivers. The direct pore-scale numerical simulation method could restore
the detailed structure of the porous media and accurately reveal the fluid
flow and heat transfer processes inside the receiver. However, this
method requires a lot of computational resources and a full-scale nu￾merical model considering the solar radiation transfer and coupled heat
transfer is difficult to build. On the other hand, the volume averaging
simulation method can realize the rapid evaluation of the thermal per￾formance of porous volumetric solar receivers which becomes the main
tool to conduct parametric sensitivity analysis and optimization design.
However, the accuracy of the simulation results of this method depends
on the rational selection of the empirical parameters. Therefore, it is
necessary to establish a full-scale direct pore-scale model to investigate
the morphologies of the porous skeleton and the transient performance of
the porous volumetric solar receiver. At the REV scale, a more efficient
optimization algorithm can be integrated into the volume-averaging
simulation method to consider irregular shapes of porous structures
and complex air flow paths, thereby optimizing the overall performance
of the porous volumetric solar receivers.
In order to enhance the volumetric absorption of the porous media,
many studies have focused on the geometrical parameters optimization
especially along the axial direction. However, different studies have not
achieved consistent results in the thermal efficiency improvement of the
multilayer design. Furthermore, although the 3D printing technique has
been utilized for fabricating porous media with non-uniform structures,
the experimental validation of the design concept remains incomplete. It
is essential to propose a general evaluation index and summarize an
optimization roadmap. On the other hand, many numerical and experi￾mental studies have proved the high efficiency of the spectrally selective
absorption concept. But experimental work is still needed for the accu￾rate measurements of radiative properties of the porous media and heat
transfer fluid. Further experiments are necessary to verify the excellent
thermal performance of the spectrally selective porous volumetric solar
receiver.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This study is supported by the National Key Research and Develop￾ment Program of China(2022YFB3304001)and the Key R&D Program of
Shaanxi province of China (No. 2022GXLH-01-04).
References
[1] M. Mehos, C. Turchi, J. Vidal, et al., Concentrating Solar Power Gen3
Demonstration Roadmap, National Renewable Energy Lab, 2017.
[2] Y.-L. He, Y. Qiu, K. Wang, et al., Perspective of concentrating solar power, Energy
198 (2020), 117373, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117373.
[3] M.-J. Li, W.-Q. Tao, Review of methodologies and polices for evaluation of energy
efficiency in high energy-consuming industry, Appl. Energy 187 (2017) 203–215,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.039.
[4] A.W. Dowling, T. Zheng, V.M. Zavala, Economic assessment of concentrated solar
power technologies: a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 72 (2017)
1019–1032, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.01.006.
[5] C.K. Ho, B.D. Iverson, Review of high-temperature central receiver designs for
concentrating solar power, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 29 (2014)
835–846, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.099.
[6] A.A. Hachicha, B.A.A. Yousef, Z. Said, et al., A review study on the modeling of
high-temperature solar thermal collector systems, Renewable Sustainable Energy
Rev. 112 (2019) 280–298, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.05.056.
[7] K. Jiang, X. Du, Y. Kong, et al., A comprehensive review on solid particle receivers
of concentrated solar power, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 116 (2019),
109463, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109463.
[8] F. Nie, F. Bai, Z. Wang, et al., Solid particle solar receivers in the next-generation
concentrated solar power plant, EcoMat 4 (5) (2022), e12207, https://doi.org/
10.1002/eom2.12207.
Fig. 22. Double-layer porous volumetric solar receivers with spectral selective absorption (a)Pitz-Paal et al. (Reproduced with permission [182]. Copyright 1991,
Elsevier); (b)Menigault et al. (Reproduced with permission [183]. Copyright 1991, Elsevier); (c)Reproduced from Sedighi et al. (Adapted with permission [184].
Copyright 2020, Elsevier).
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
18

[9] S.P. Tembhare, D.P. Barai, B.A. Bhanvase, Performance evaluation of nanofluids in
solar thermal and solar photovoltaic systems: a comprehensive review, Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev. 153 (2022), 111738, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rser.2021.111738.
[10] W. Chamsa-Ard, S. Brundavanam, C.C. Fung, et al., Nanofluid types, their
synthesis, properties and incorporation in direct solar thermal collectors: a review,
Nanomaterials 7 (6) (2017) 131, https://doi.org/10.3390/nano7060131.
[11] A. Gil, B. Grange, V.G. Perez, et al., CSPonD Demonstrative Project: Start-Up
Process of a 25 kW Prototype, AIP Conference Proceedings, 2017.
[12] A.H. Slocum, D.S. Codd, J. Buongiorno, et al., Concentrated solar power on
demand, Sol. Energy 85 (7) (2011) 1519–1529, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.solener.2011.04.010.
[13] A. Lenert, E.N. Wang, Optimization of nanofluid volumetric receivers for solar
thermal energy conversion, Sol. Energy 86 (1) (2012) 253–265, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.solener.2011.09.029.
[14] M. Tetreault-Friend, M. Diago, T.A. Cooper, et al., A floating modular cover for
high temperature open-tank molten salt solar-thermal volumetric receivers, Sol.
Energy 176 (2018) 465–482, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.10.047.
[15] J.E.P. Navalho, J.C.F. Pereira, A comprehensive and fully predictive discrete
methodology for volumetric solar receivers: application to a functional parabolic
dish solar collector system, Appl. Energy 267 (2020), 114781, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114781.
[16] A. Kribus, M. Grijnevich, Y. Gray, et al., Parametric study of volumetric absorber
performance, Energy Proc. 49 (2014) 408–417, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.egypro.2014.03.044.
[17] A. Kribus, Y. Gray, M. Grijnevich, et al., The promise and challenge of solar
volumetric absorbers, Sol. Energy 110 (2014) 463–481, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.solener.2014.09.035.
[18] F. Zaversky, L. Aldaz, M. Sanchez, et al., Numerical and experimental evaluation
and optimization of ceramic foam as solar absorber – single-layer vs multi-layer
configurations, Appl. Energy 210 (2018) 351–375, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2017.11.003.
[19] W.E.C. Pritzkow, Pressure loaded volumetric ceramic receiver, Sol. Energy Mater.
24 (1) (1991) 498–507, https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1633(91)90086-Z.
[20] A.L. Avila-Marín, Volumetric receivers in solar thermal power plants with central 
receiver system technology: a review, Sol. Energy 85 (5) (2011) 891–910, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2011.02.002.
[21] M. Silva, H. Fricker, C. Winkler, et al., Design and Test Result of Wire Receiver
Experiment – Almeria, 4th International Solar Energy Conference, Santa Fe, NM,
USA, 1988.
[22] W. Grasse, PHOEBUS: international 30 MWe solar tower plant, Sol. Energy Mater.
24 (1-4) (1991) 82–94, https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1633(91)90050-U.
[23] A. Finker, M. Schmitz-Goeb, D. Streuber, Phoebus tests successful, Mod. Power
Syst. 13 (10) (1993) 21–25.
[24] M. Bohmer, C. Chaza, The ceramic foil volumetric receiver, Sol. Energy Mater. 24 €
(1) (1991) 182–191, https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1633(91)90058-S.
[25] B. Hoffschmidt, V. Fernandez, A. Konstandopoulos, et al., Development of Ceramic
Volumetric Receiver Technology, 5th Cologne Solar Symposium, Cologne, 2001.
[26] B. Hoffschmidt, F.M. Tellez, A. Valverde, et al., Performance evaluation of the
200-kWth HiTRec-II open volumetric air receiver, J. Sol. Energy Eng. 125 (1)
(2003) 87–94, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1530627.
[27] F Tellez Sufrategui, Thermal Performance Evaluation of the 200kWth SolAir
Volumetric Solar Receiver, Plataforma Solar de Almería, 2003.
[28] F. Tellez, M. Romero, P. Heller, et al., Thermal Performance of SolAir 3000 kWth
Ceramic Volumetric Solar Receiver, 12th International Symposium Solar Power
and Chemical Energy Systems, Oaxaca, Mexico, 2004.
[29] S. Pomp, P. Schwarzbozl, G. Koll, et al., The Solar Tower Jülich € –first operational
experiences and test results, in: Proceedings. SolarPACES 2010 Conference,
Perpignan, Frankreich, 2010.
[30] G. Koll, P. Schwarzbozl, K. Hennecke, et al., The Solar Tower Jülich-A Research €
and Demonstration Plant for Central Receiver Systems, SolarPACES 2009, Berlin,
Germany, 2009.
[31] A. Tiddens, M. Roger, H. Stadler, et al., Air return ratio measurements at the solar €
tower Jülich using a tracer gas method, Sol. Energy 146 (2017) 351–358, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.02.027.
[32] R. Buck, M. Abele, J. Kunberger, et al., Receiver for solar-hybrid gas turbine and
combined cycle systems, J. Phys. IV 9 (3) (1999) 537–544, https://doi.org/
10.1051/jp4:1999385.
[33] R. Buck, T. Brauning, T. Denk, et al., Solar-hybrid gas turbine-based power tower
systems (REFOS), J. Sol. Energy Eng. 124 (1) (2001) 2–9, https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.1445444.
[34] A. Kribus, P. Doron, R. Rubin, et al., Performance of the directly-irradiated annular
pressurized receiver (DIAPR) operating at 20 bar and 1,200C, J. Sol. Energy Eng.
123 (1) (2000) 10–17, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1345844.
[35] P. Heller, M. Pf€ander, T. Denk, et al., Test and evaluation of a solar powered gas
turbine system, Sol. Energy 80 (10) (2006) 1225–1230, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.solener.2005.04.020.
[36] A. del Río, R. Korzynietz, J.A. Brioso, et al., Soltrec – pressurized volumetric solar
air receiver technology, Energy Proc. 69 (2015) 360–368, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.042.
[37] J. Zhu, K. Wang, G. Li, et al., Experimental study of the energy and exergy
performance for a pressurized volumetric solar receiver, Appl. Therm. Eng. 104
(2016) 212–221, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.05.075.
[38] L. Aichmayer, J. Garrido, W. Wang, et al., Experimental evaluation of a novel solar
receiver for a micro gas-turbine based solar dish system in the KTH high-flux solar
simulator, Energy 159 (2018) 184–195, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.energy.2018.06.120.
[39] F. Zaversky, Competitive Solar Power Towers – the Potential and Challenge of
Solar Powered Combined Cycles – Next Development Steps, 2019.
[40] F. Zaversky, F. Cabello, A. Bernardos, et al., A novel high-efficiency solar thermal
power plant featuring electricity storage - ideal for the future power grid with high
shares of renewables, AIP Conf. Proc. 2445 (1) (2022), 060008, https://doi.org/
10.1063/5.0085718.
[41] F. Zaversky, J. Fernandez-Reche, M. Casanova, et al., Experimental testing of a
300 kWth open volumetric air receiver (OVAR) coupled with a small-scale brayton
cycle. Operating experience and lessons learnt, SolarPACES (2021) 2021.
[42] A. Carotenuto, F. Reale, G. Ruocco, et al., Thermal behaviour of a multi-cavity
volumetric solar receiver: design and tests results, Sol. Energy 50 (2) (1993)
113–121, https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(93)90082-Y.
[43] T. Hellmuth, L. Matthews, Experimental characterization of a high-temperature,
high-flux, solar volumetric receiver, Exp. Heat Tran. 10 (2) (1997) 141–163,
https://doi.org/10.1080/08916159708946540.
[44] Q. Zhu, Y. Xuan, X. Liu, et al., A 130 kWe solar simulator with tunable ultra-high
flux and characterization using direct multiple lamps mapping, Appl. Energy 270
(2020), 115165, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115165.
[45] M. Roger, P. Herrmann, S. Ulmer, et al., Techniques to measure solar € flux density
distribution on large-scale receivers, J. Sol. Energy Eng. 136 (3) (2014), 031013,
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4027261.
[46] S. Mey-Cloutier, C. Caliot, A. Kribus, et al., Experimental study of ceramic foams
used as high temperature volumetric solar absorber, Sol. Energy 136 (2016)
226–235, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.06.066.
[47] J.M. Chavez, C. Chaza, Testing of a porous ceramic absorber for a volumetric air
receiver, Sol. Energy Mater. 24 (1) (1991) 172–181, https://doi.org/10.1016/
0165-1633(91)90057-R.
[48] T. Fend, P. Schwarzbozl, O. Smirnova, et al., Numerical investigation of € flow and
heat transfer in a volumetric solar receiver, Renew. Energy 60 (2013) 655–661,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.06.001.
[49] M. Cagnoli, L. Savoldi, R. Zanino, et al., Coupled optical and CFD parametric
analysis of an open volumetric air receiver of honeycomb type for central tower
CSP plants, Sol. Energy 155 (2017) 523–536, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.solener.2017.06.038.
[50] A.L. Avila-Marin, M. Alvarez-Lara, J. Fernandez-Reche, Experimental results of
gradual porosity wire mesh absorber for volumetric receivers, Energy Proc. 49
(2014) 275–283, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.030.
[51] A.L. Avila-Marin, C. Caliot, G. Flamant, et al., Numerical determination of the heat
transfer coefficient for volumetric air receivers with wire meshes, Sol. Energy 162
(2018) 317–329, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.01.034.
[52] Z. Wu, C. Caliot, G. Flamant, et al., Numerical simulation of convective heat
transfer between air flow and ceramic foams to optimise volumetric solar air
receiver performances, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 54 (7) (2011) 1527–1537, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2010.11.037.
[53] T.J. Lu, H.A. Stone, M.F. Ashby, Heat transfer in open-cell metal foams, Acta
Mater. 46 (10) (1998) 3619–3635, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-6454(98)
00031-7.
[54] I. Ghosh, Heat-transfer analysis of high porosity open-cell metal foam, J. Heat
Tran. 130 (3) (2008), 034501, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2804941.
[55] Q. Yu, B.E. Thompson, A.G. Straatman, A unit cube-based model for heat transfer
and fluid flow in porous carbon foam, J. Heat Tran. 128 (4) (2005) 352–360,
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2165203.
[56] S.A.M. Karimian, A.G. Straatman, CFD study of the hydraulic and thermal
behavior of spherical-void-phase porous materials, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 29 (1)
(2008) 292–305, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2007.07.003.
[57] S. Krishnan, J.Y. Murthy, S.V. Garimella, Direct simulation of transport in open￾cell metal foam, J. Heat Tran. 128 (8) (2006) 793–799, https://doi.org/10.1115/
1.2227038.
[58] S. Krishnan, S.V. Garimella, J.Y. Murthy, Simulation of thermal transport in open￾cell metal foams: effect of periodic unit-cell structure, J. Heat Tran. 130 (2)
(2008), 024503, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2789718.
[59] M. Bai, J.N. Chung, Analytical and numerical prediction of heat transfer and
pressure drop in open-cell metal foams, Int. J. Therm. Sci. 50 (6) (2011) 869–880,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2011.01.007.
[60] D. Weaire, R. Phelan, A counter-example to Kelvin's conjecture on minimal
surfaces, Phil. Mag. Lett. 69 (2) (1994) 107–110, https://doi.org/10.1080/
09500839408241577.
[61] K. Boomsma, D. Poulikakos, Y. Ventikos, Simulations of flow through open cell
metal foams using an idealized periodic cell structure, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 24
(6) (2003) 825–834, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2003.08.002.
[62] Z. Nie, Y. Lin, Q. Tong, Modeling structures of open cell foams, Comput. Mater.
Sci. 131 (2017) 160–169, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2017.01.029.
[63] T. Wejrzanowski, J. Skibinski, J. Szumbarski, et al., Structure of foams modeled by
Laguerre–Voronoi tessellations, Comput. Mater. Sci. 67 (2013) 216–221, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2012.08.046.
[64] M. Kırca, A. Gül, E. Ekinci, et al., Computational modeling of micro-cellular carbon
foams, Finite Elem. Anal. Des. 44 (1–2) (2007) 45–52, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.finel.2007.08.008.
[65] P. Habisreuther, N. Djordjevic, N. Zarzalis, Statistical distribution of residence
time and tortuosity of flow through open-cell foams, Chem. Eng. Sci. 64 (23)
(2009) 4943–4954, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2009.07.033.
[66] H. Okabe, M.J. Blunt, Pore space reconstruction using multiple-point statistics,
J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 46 (1) (2005) 121–137, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.petrol.2004.08.002.
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
19

[67] M. Wang, J. Wang, N. Pan, et al., Mesoscopic predictions of the effective thermal
conductivity for microscale random porous media, Phys. Rev. E 75 (3) (2007),
036702, https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.75.036702.
[68] Y.-L. He, T. Xie, Advances of thermal conductivity models of nanoscale silica
aerogel insulation material, Appl. Therm. Eng. 81 (2015) 28–50, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2015.02.013.
[69] J. Petrasch, F. Meier, H. Friess, et al., Tomography based determination of
permeability, Dupuit–Forchheimer coefficient, and interfacial heat transfer
coefficient in reticulate porous ceramics, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 29 (1) (2008)
315–326, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2007.09.001.
[70] K.K. Bodla, J.Y. Murthy, S.V. Garimella, Microtomography-based simulation of
transport through open-cell metal foams, Numer. Heat Tran., Part A: Applications
58 (7) (2010) 527–544, https://doi.org/10.1080/10407782.2010.511987.
[71] M. Iasiello, S. Cunsolo, M. Oliviero, et al., Numerical analysis of heat transfer and
pressure drop in metal foams for different morphological models, J. Heat Tran.
136 (11) (2014), 112601, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4028113.
[72] P. Ranut, E. Nobile, L. Mancini, High resolution microtomography-based CFD
simulation of flow and heat transfer in aluminum metal foams, Appl. Therm. Eng.
69 (1) (2014) 230–240, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2013.11.056.
[73] S. Suter, A. Steinfeld, S. Haussener, Pore-level engineering of macroporous media
for increased performance of solar-driven thermochemical fuel processing, Int. J.
Heat Mass Tran. 78 (2014) 688–698, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijheatmasstransfer.2014.07.020.
[74] A. Diani, K.K. Bodla, L. Rossetto, et al., Numerical investigation of pressure drop
and heat transfer through reconstructed metal foams and comparison against
experiments, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 88 (2015) 508–515, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2015.04.038.
[75] M. Zafari, M. Panjepour, M. Davazdah Emami, et al., Microtomography-based
numerical simulation of fluid flow and heat transfer in open cell metal foams,
Appl. Therm. Eng. 80 (2015) 347–354, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.applthermaleng.2015.01.045.
[76] T. Dixit, I. Ghosh, Simulation intricacies of open-cell metal foam fin subjected to
convective flow, Appl. Therm. Eng. 137 (2018) 532–544, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.04.011.
[77] C. Sinn, G.R. Pesch, J. Thoming, et al., Coupled conjugate heat transfer and heat €
production in open-cell ceramic foams investigated using CFD, Int. J. Heat Mass
Tran. 139 (2019) 600–612, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.05.042.
[78] R. Wang, A. Hou, Z. Wu, Tomography-based investigation of flow and heat
transfer inside reticulated porous ceramics, Appl. Therm. Eng. 184 (2021),
116115, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.116115.
[79] S. Du, M.-J. Li, Q. Ren, et al., Pore-scale numerical simulation of fully coupled heat
transfer process in porous volumetric solar receiver, Energy 140 (2017)
1267–1275, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.08.062.
[80] G. Ambrosio, N. Bianco, W.K.S. Chiu, et al., The effect of open-cell metal foams
strut shape on convection heat transfer and pressure drop, Appl. Therm. Eng. 103
(2016) 333–343, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.04.085.
[81] S. Haussener, P. Coray, W. Lipinski, et al., Tomography-based heat and mass 
transfer characterization of reticulate porous ceramics for high-temperature
processing, J. Heat Tran. 132 (2) (2009), 023305, https://doi.org/10.1115/
HT2009-88031.
[82] M. Nakakura, S. Bellan, K. Matsubara, et al., Conjugate radiation-convection￾conduction simulation of volumetric solar receivers with cut-back inlets, Sol.
Energy 170 (2018) 606–617, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.06.006.
[83] M. Nakakura, K. Matsubara, S. Bellan, et al., Direct simulation of a volumetric
solar receiver with different cell sizes at high outlet temperatures (1,000–1,500 C), Renew. Energy 146 (2020) 1143–1152, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.renene.2019.07.039.
[84] P. Garcia, A. Ferriere, J.-J. Bezian, Codes for solar flux calculation dedicated to
central receiver system applications: a comparative review, Sol. Energy 82 (3)
(2008) 189–197, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2007.08.004.
[85] S.-J. Bode, P. Gauche, Review of optical software for use in concentrating solar
power systems, in: Proceedings of South African Solar Energy Conference,
Stellenbosch, South Africa, 2012.
[86] Y. Qiu, Y.-L. He, Z.-D. Cheng, et al., Study on optical and thermal performance of a
linear Fresnel solar reflector using molten salt as HTF with MCRT and FVM
methods, Appl. Energy 146 (2015) 162–173, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2015.01.135.
[87] Y.-L. He, F.-Q. Cui, Z.-D. Cheng, et al., Numerical simulation of solar radiation
transmission process for the solar tower power plant: from the heliostat field to the
pressurized volumetric receiver, Appl. Therm. Eng. 61 (2) (2013) 583–595,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2013.08.015.
[88] F.-Q. Cui, Y.-L. He, Z.-D. Cheng, et al., Modeling of the dish receiver with the effect
of inhomogeneous radiation flux distribution, Heat Tran. Eng. 35 (6-8) (2014)
780–790, https://doi.org/10.1080/08832323.2013.838098.
[89] Z.D. Cheng, Y.L. He, F.Q. Cui, et al., Comparative and sensitive analysis for
parabolic trough solar collectors with a detailed Monte Carlo ray-tracing optical
model, Appl. Energy 115 (2014) 559–572, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2013.11.001.
[90] M. Sanchez, M. Marcos, M. Romero, et al., Design parameters influence on flux
distribution through prismatic channels of volumetric absorbers, EuroSun2004, in:
Proceedings of the 14th International Sonnenforum, Freiburg, Germany, 2004.
[91] M. Ali, M. Rady, M.A.A. Attia, et al., Consistent coupled optical and thermal
analysis of volumetric solar receivers with honeycomb absorbers, Renew. Energy
145 (2020) 1849–1861, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.07.082.
[92] Q. Zhu, Y. Xuan, Pore scale numerical simulation of heat transfer and flow in
porous volumetric solar receivers, Appl. Therm. Eng. 120 (2017) 150–159,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.03.141.
[93] Y. Zhao, G.H. Tang, Monte Carlo study on extinction coefficient of silicon carbide
porous media used for solar receiver, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 92 (2016)
1061–1065, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2015.08.105.
[94] S. Du, Q. Ren, Y.-L. He, Optical and radiative properties analysis and optimization
study of the gradually-varied volumetric solar receiver, Appl. Energy 207 (2017)
27–35, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.05.165.
[95] S. Guevelou, B. Rousseau, G. Domingues, et al., A simple expression for the normal
spectral emittance of open-cell foams composed of optically thick and smooth
struts, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 189 (2017) 329–338, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jqsrt.2016.12.011.
[96] S.Z. Shuja, B.S. Yilbas, Innovative design of a solar volumetric receiver:
arrangements of absorbing block configurations, Sol. Energy 146 (2017) 105–112,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.02.029.
[97] A. Dybbs, R.V. Edwards, A new look at porous media fluid mechanics — Darcy to
turbulent, in: J. Bear, M.Y. Corapcioglu (Eds.), Fundamentals of Transport
Phenomena in Porous Media, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1984,
pp. 199–256.
[98] S. Du, Z.-X. Tong, H.-H. Zhang, et al., Tomography-based determination of Nusselt
number correlation for the porous volumetric solar receiver with different
geometrical parameters, Renew. Energy 135 (2019) 711–718, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.renene.2018.12.001.
[99] W. Liu, A. Fan, X. Huang, Theory and Application of Heat and Mass Transfer in
Porous Media China, Science Publishing & Media Ltd.(CSPM), 2006.
[100] S. Ergun, A.A. Orning, Fluid flow through randomly packed columns and fluidized
beds, Ind. Eng. Chem. 41 (6) (1949) 1179–1184, https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie50474a011.
[101] S. Ergun, Fluid flow through packed columns, Chem. Eng. Prog. 48 (1952) 89–94.
[102] B. Dietrich, W. Schabel, M. Kind, et al., Pressure drop measurements of ceramic
sponges—determining the hydraulic diameter, Chem. Eng. Sci. 64 (16) (2009)
3633–3640, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2009.05.005.
[103] B. Madani, F. Topin, F. Rigollet, et al., Flow laws in metallic foams: experimental
determination of inertial and viscous contributions, J. Porous Media 10 (1) (2007)
51–70, https://doi.org/10.1615/JPorMedia.v10.i1.40.
[104] Z. Wu, C. Caliot, F. Bai, et al., Experimental and numerical studies of the pressure
drop in ceramic foams for volumetric solar receiver applications, Appl, Energy 87
(2) (2010) 504–513, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2009.08.009.
[105] Z. Nie, Y. Lin, Q. Tong, Numerical investigation of pressure drop and heat transfer
through open cell foams with 3D Laguerre-Voronoi model, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran.
113 (2017) 819–839, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.05.119.
[106] P. Kumar, F. Topin, State-of-the-Art of pressure drop in open-cell porous foams:
review of experiments and correlations, J. Fluid Eng. 139 (11) (2017), 111401,
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4037034.
[107] D. Edouard, M. Lacroix, C.P. Huu, et al., Pressure drop modeling on SOLID foam:
state-of-the art correlation, Chem. Eng. J. 144 (2) (2008) 299–311, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2008.06.007.
[108] C. Xu, Z. Song, L-d Chen, et al., Numerical investigation on porous media heat
transfer in a solar tower receiver, Renew. Energy 36 (3) (2011) 1138–1144,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2010.09.017.
[109] P. Wang, K. Vafai, Modeling and analysis of an efficient porous media for a solar
porous absorber with a variable pore structure, J. Sol. Energy Eng. 139 (5) (2017),
051005, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4037161.
[110] F. Wang, Y. Shuai, H. Tan, et al., Thermal performance analysis of porous media
receiver with concentrated solar irradiation, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 62 (2013)
247–254, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2013.03.003.
[111] X-l Meng, X.- l Xia, N. Sellami, et al., Coupled heat transfer performance of a high
temperature cup shaped porous absorber, Energy Convers. Manag. 110 (2016)
327–337, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.12.034.
[112] Z. Wu, C. Caliot, G. Flamant, et al., Coupled radiation and flow modeling in
ceramic foam volumetric solar air receivers, Sol. Energy 85 (9) (2011) 2374–2385,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2011.06.030.
[113] S. Mey, C. Caliot, G. Flamant, et al., Optimization of high temperature SiC
volumetric solar absorber, Energy Proc. 49 (2014) 478–487, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.051.
[114] F. Wang, J. Tan, S. Yong, et al., Thermal performance analyses of porous media
solar receiver with different irradiative transfer models, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 78
(Supplement C) (2014) 7–16, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijheatmasstransfer.2014.06.035.
[115] X. Chen, X.-L. Xia, X.-L. Meng, et al., Thermal performance analysis on a
volumetric solar receiver with double-layer ceramic foam, Energy Convers.
Manag. 97 (2015) 282–289, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2015.03.066.
[116] X. Chen, X.-L. Xia, H. Liu, et al., Heat transfer analysis of a volumetric solar
receiver by coupling the solar radiation transport and internal heat transfer,
Energy Convers. Manag. 114 (2016) 20–27, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enconman.2016.01.074.
[117] X. Chen, X.-L. Xia, X.-W. Yan, et al., Heat transfer analysis of a volumetric solar
receiver with composite porous structure, Energy Convers. Manag. 136 (2017)
262–269, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2017.01.018.
[118] M.E. Nimvari, N.F. Jouybari, Q. Esmaili, A new approach to mitigate intense
temperature gradients in ceramic foam solar receivers, Renew. Energy 122 (2018)
206–215, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.01.117.
[119] G. Barreto, P. Canhoto, M. Collares-Pereira, Three-dimensional CFD modelling and
thermal performance analysis of porous volumetric receivers coupled to solar
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
20

concentration systems, Appl. Energy 252 (2019), 113433, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113433.
[120] G. Barreto, P. Canhoto, M. Collares-Pereira, Parametric analysis and optimisation
of porous volumetric solar receivers made of open-cell SiC ceramic foam, Energy
200 (2020), 117476, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2020.117476.
[121] M. Lacroix, P. Nguyen, D. Schweich, et al., Pressure drop measurements and
modeling on SiC foams, Chem. Eng. Sci. 62 (12) (2007) 3259–3267, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2007.03.027.
[122] F. Bai, One dimensional thermal analysis of silicon carbide ceramic foam used for
solar air receiver, Int. J. Therm. Sci. 49 (12) (2010) 2400–2404, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2010.08.010.
[123] B. Dietrich, Pressure drop correlation for ceramic and metal sponges, Chem. Eng.
Sci. 74 (2012) 192–199, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2012.02.047.
[124] A.L. Avila-Marin, J. Fernandez-Reche, A. Martinez-Tarifa, Modelling strategies for
porous structures as solar receivers in central receiver systems: a review,
Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 111 (2019) 15–33, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rser.2019.03.059.
[125] P. Jiang, X. Ouyang, R. Xu, Discussions on Local Thermal Non-equilibrium Model
for Convectional Heat Transfer in Porous Media, Chinese Congress of Theoretical
and Applied Mechanics, 2011.
[126] M.I. Roldan, O. Smirnova, T. Fend, et al., Thermal analysis and design of a
volumetric solar absorber depending on the porosity, Renew. Energy 62 (2014)
116–128, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2013.06.043.
[127] S. Du, Y.-L. He, W.-W. Yang, et al., Optimization method for the porous volumetric
solar receiver coupling genetic algorithm and heat transfer analysis, Int. J. Heat
Mass Tran. 122 (2018) 383–390, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijheatmasstransfer.2018.01.120.
[128] K. Vafai, Handbook of Porous Media, Crc Press, 2015.
[129] T.J. Hendricks, J.R. Howell, Absorption/scattering coefficients and scattering
phase functions in reticulated porous ceramics, J. Heat Tran. 118 (1) (1996)
79–87, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2824071.
[130] L.G. Henyey, J.L. Greenstein, Diffuse radiation in the galaxy, Astrophys. J. 93
(1941) 70–83, https://doi.org/10.1086/144246.
[131] X. Chen, X.- l Xia, X.- h Dong, et al., Integrated analysis on the volumetric
absorption characteristics and optical performance for a porous media receiver,
Energy Convers. Manag. 105 (2015) 562–569, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enconman.2015.08.028.
[132] Y. Qiu, M.-J. Li, Y.-L. He, et al., Optical Performance Analysis of a Porous Open
Volumetric Air Receiver in a Solar Power Tower, 2nd Thermal and Fluid
Engineering Conference (TFEC2017) and 4th International Workshop on Heat
Transfer (IWHT2017), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2017.
[133] G. Barreto, P. Canhoto, M. Collares-Pereira, Combined experimental and
numerical determination of the asymmetry factor of scattering phase functions in
porous volumetric solar receivers, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 206 (2020),
110327, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.110327.
[134] L. Wang, S.L. Jacques, L. Zheng, MCML—Monte Carlo modeling of light transport
in multi-layered tissues, Comput, Methods Programs Biomed 47 (2) (1995)
131–146, https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-2607(95)01640-F.
[135] S.A. Prahl, M. Keijzer, S.L. Jacques, et al., A Monte Carlo Model of Light
Propagation in Tissue, Dosimetry of Laser Radiation in Medicine and Biology,
1989. Berlin, Germany.
[136] P. Ranut, On the effective thermal conductivity of aluminum metal foams: review
and improvement of the available empirical and analytical models, Appl. Therm.
Eng. 101 (2016) 496–524, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.applthermaleng.2015.09.094.
[137] V.V. Calmidi, R.L. Mahajan, The effective thermal conductivity of high porosity
fibrous metal foams, J. Heat Tran. 121 (2) (1999) 466–471, https://doi.org/
10.1115/1.2826001.
[138] J.W. Paek, B.H. Kang, S.Y. Kim, et al., Effective thermal conductivity and
permeability of aluminum foam Materials1, Int. J. Thermophys. 21 (2) (2000)
453–464, https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1006643815323.
[139] A. Bhattacharya, V.V. Calmidi, R.L. Mahajan, Thermophysical properties of high
porosity metal foams, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 45 (5) (2002) 1017–1031, https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(01)00220-4.
[140] E.N. Schmierer, J. Paquette, A. Razani, et al., Effective Thermal Conductivity of
Fully-Saturated High Porosity Metal Foam, Heat Transfer Summer Conference,
Charlotte, North Carolina, USA, 2004.
[141] E. Sadeghi, S. Hsieh, M. Bahrami, Thermal conductivity and contact resistance of
metal foams, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 44 (12) (2011), 125406, https://doi.org/
10.1088/0022-3727/44/12/125406.
[142] T. Fiedler, I.V. Belova, Murch Ge, Critical analysis of the experimental
determination of the thermal resistance of metal foams, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 55
(15) (2012) 4415–4420, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.04.010.
[143] J. Vicente, J.-V. Daurelle, F. Rigollet, Thermal Conductivity of Metallic Foam:
Simulation on Real X-Ray Tomographied Porous Medium and Photothermal
Experiments, 13, International Heat Transfer Conference, Sydney, Australia, 2006.
[144] T. Fiedler, E. Solorzano, F. Garcia-Moreno, et al., Lattice Monte Carlo and 
experimental analyses of the thermal conductivity of random-shaped cellular
aluminum, Adv. Eng. Mater. 11 (10) (2009) 843–847, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adem.200900132.
[145] E. Solorzano, J.A. Reglero, M.A. Rodríguez-P  erez, et al., An experimental study on
the thermal conductivity of aluminium foams by using the transient plane source
method, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 51 (25) (2008) 6259–6267, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2007.11.062.
[146] R. Wulf, M.A.A. Mendes, V. Skibina, et al., Experimental and numerical
determination of effective thermal conductivity of open cell FeCrAl-alloy metal
foams, Int. J. Therm. Sci. 86 (2014) 95–103, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijthermalsci.2014.06.030.
[147] M. Bracconi, M. Ambrosetti, M. Maestri, et al., A fundamental analysis of the
influence of the geometrical properties on the effective thermal conductivity of
open-cell foams, Chemical Engineering and Processing - Process Intensification
129 (2018) 181–189, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2018.04.018.
[148] P. Kumar, F. Topin, Simultaneous determination of intrinsic solid phase
conductivity and effective thermal conductivity of Kelvin like foams, Appl. Therm.
Eng. 71 (1) (2014) 536–547, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.applthermaleng.2014.06.058.
[149] B. Dietrich, G. Schell, E.C. Bucharsky, et al., Determination of the thermal
properties of ceramic sponges, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 53 (1) (2010) 198–205,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2009.09.041.
[150] M. Schuetz, L.R. Glicksman, A basic study of heat transfer through foam insulation,
J. Cell. Plast. 20 (2) (1984) 114–121, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0021955X8402000203.
[151] K. Kamiuto, Modeling of composite heat transfer in open-cellular porous materials
at high temperatures, in: A. Ochsner, G.E. Murch, M.J.S.d. Lemos (Eds.), Cellular
and Porous Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Germany, 2008, pp. 165–198.
[152] L.B. Younis, R. Viskanta, Experimental determination of the volumetric heat
transfer coefficient between stream of air and ceramic foam, Int. J. Heat Mass
Tran. 36 (6) (1993) 1425–1434, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(05)80053-
5.
[153] B. Dietrich, Heat transfer coefficients for solid ceramic sponges–experimental
results and correlation, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 61 (2013) 627–637, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2013.02.019.
[154] L. Giani, G. Groppi, E. Tronconi, Heat transfer characterization of metallic foams,
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 44 (24) (2005) 9078–9085, https://doi.org/10.1021/
ie050598p.
[155] H. Lu, L. Yang, Z. Wu, et al., Numerical and experimental study on convective heat
transfer characteristics in foam materials, Energies 13 (2) (2020) 348, https://
doi.org/10.3390/en13020348.
[156] X.- l Xia, X. Chen, C. Sun, et al., Experiment on the convective heat transfer from
airflow to skeleton in open-cell porous foams, Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 106 (2017)
83–90, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016.10.053.
[157] J.J. Hwang, G.J. Hwang, R.H. Yeh, et al., Measurement of interstitial convective
heat transfer and frictional drag for flow across metal foams, J. Heat Tran. 124 (1)
(2001) 120–129, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1416690.
[158] K. Ando, H. Hirai, Y. Sano, An accurate experimental determination of interstitial
heat transfer coefficients of ceramic foams using the single blow method, Open
Transport. Phenom. J. 5 (1) (2013) 7–12, https://doi.org/10.2174/
1877729501305010007.
[159] K. Ichimiya, A new method for evaluation of heat transfer between solid material
and fluid in a porous medium, J. Heat Tran. 121 (4) (1999) 978–983, https://
doi.org/10.1115/1.2826089.
[160] S. Meinicke, B. Dietrich, T. Wetzel, Pore-scale Numerical Analysis of
Hydrodynamics and Conjugate Heat Transfer in Solid Sponges, 16, International
Heat Transfer Conference, Beijing, China, 2018.
[161] Z. Liu, H. Wu, Pore-scale study on flow and heat transfer in 3D reconstructed
porous media using micro-tomography images, Appl. Therm. Eng. 100 (2016)
602–610, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.02.057.
[162] S. Du, M.-J. Li, Z. Liu, et al., Pore-scale numerical study on the heat transfer
process in porous media under different thermal conditions, in: 2018 International
Heat Transfer Conference, IHTC-16), Beijing, China, 2018.
[163] X. Fu, R. Viskanta, J. Gore, Measurement and correlation of volumetric heat
transfer coefficients of cellular ceramics, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 17 (4) (1998)
285–293, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0894-1777(98)10002-X.
[164] S. Du, T. Xia, Y.-L. He, et al., Experiment and optimization study on the radial
graded porous volumetric solar receiver matching non-uniform solar flux
distribution, Appl. Energy 275 (2020), 115343, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2020.115343.
[165] S. Du, Z. Li, Y. He, et al., Experimental and numerical analysis of the hydraulic and
thermal performances of the gradually-varied porous volumetric solar receiver,
Sci. China Technol. Sci. 63 (7) (2020) 1224–1234, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11431-020-1580-2.
[166] G.J. Hwang, C.C. Wu, C.H. Chao, Investigation of non-darcian forced convection in
an asymmetrically heated sintered porous channel, J. Heat Tran. 117 (3) (1995)
725–732, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2822636.
[167] N. Wakao, S. Kaguei, T. Funazkri, Effect of fluid dispersion coefficients on particle￾to-fluid heat transfer coefficients in packed beds: correlation of nusselt numbers,
Chem. Eng. Sci. 34 (3) (1979) 325–336, https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2509(79)
85064-2.
[168] J.R. Howell, M.P. Menguc, R. Siegel, Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer, CRC press,
2010.
[169] ANSYS Fluent UDF Manual. ANSYS Inc., 2013.
[170] Z. Wu, Z. Wang, Fully coupled transient modeling of ceramic foam volumetric
solar air receiver, Sol. Energy 89 (Supplement C) (2013) 122–133, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2012.12.016.
[171] F. Wang, Z. Guan, J. Tan, et al., Transient thermal performance response
characteristics of porous-medium receiver heated by multi-dish concentrator, Int.
Commun. Heat Mass Tran. 75 (Supplement C) (2016) 36–41, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.icheatmasstransfer.2016.03.028.
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
21

[172] A.L. Avila-Marin, M. Alvarez de Lara, J. Fernandez-Reche, Experimental results of
gradual porosity volumetric air receivers with wire meshes, Renew. Energy 122
(2018) 339–353, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.01.073.
[173] A.L. Avila-Marin, CFD parametric analysis of wire meshes open volumetric
receivers with axial-varied porosity and comparison with small-scale solar receiver
tests, Renew. Energy 193 (2022) 1094–1105, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.renene.2022.05.060.
[174] T. Fend, R. Pitz-Paal, O. Reutter, et al., Two novel high-porosity materials as
volumetric receivers for concentrated solar radiation, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells
84 (1-4) (2004) 291–304, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2004.01.039.
[175] S. Luque, G. Menendez, M. Roccabruna, et al., Exploiting volumetric effects in
novel additively manufactured open solar receivers, Sol. Energy 174 (2018)
342–351, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2018.09.030.
[176] R. Capuano, T. Fend, H. Stadler, et al., Optimized volumetric solar receiver:
thermal performance prediction and experimental validation, Renew. Energy 114
(2017) 556–566, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2017.07.071.
[177] A.L. Avila-Marin, J. Fernandez-Reche, S. Gianella, et al., Experimental study of
innovative periodic cellular structures as air volumetric absorbers, Renew. Energy
184 (2022) 391–404, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.11.021.
[178] M. Hoes, S. Ackermann, D. Theiler, et al., Additive-Manufactured ordered porous
structures made of ceria for concentrating solar applications, Energy Technol. 7
(9) (2019), 1900484, https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201900484.
[179] C. Heisel, C. Caliot, T. Chartier, et al., Digital design and 3D printing of innovative
SiC architectures for high temperature volumetric solar receivers, Sol. Energy
Mater. Sol. Cells 232 (2021), 111336, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.solmat.2021.111336.
[180] P. Bermel, J. Lee, J.D. Joannopoulos, et al., Selective solar absorbers, in: V. Prasad,
Y. Jaluria, Z. Zhang (Eds.), Annual Review of Heat Transfer, BEGELL HOUSE Inc.,
USA, 2012, pp. 231–254.
[181] G. Olalde, G. Flamant, D. Schwander, et al., Advanced high temperature semi￾transparent solar absorbers, Sol. Energy Mater. 12 (6) (1985) 461–469, https://
doi.org/10.1016/0165-1633(85)90039-5.
[182] R. Pitz-Paal, J. Morhenne, M. Fiebig, A new concept of a selective solar receiver for
high temperature applications, Sol. Energy Mater. 24 (1) (1991) 293–306, https://
doi.org/10.1016/0165-1633(91)90070-2.
[183] T. Menigault, G. Flamant, B. Rivoire, Advanced high-temperature two-slab
selective volumetric receiver, Sol. Energy Mater. 24 (1) (1991) 192–203, https://
doi.org/10.1016/0165-1633(91)90059-T.
[184] M. Sedighi, R.V. Padilla, P. Alamdari, et al., A novel high-temperature (>700 C),
volumetric receiver with a packed bed of transparent and absorbing spheres, Appl.
Energy 264 (2020), 114705, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114705.
[185] Q. Zhu, Y. Xuan, Improving the performance of volumetric solar receivers with a
spectrally selective gradual structure and swirling characteristics, Energy 172
(2019) 467–476, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.01.166.
[186] E. Sani, L. Mercatelli, P. Sansoni, et al., Spectrally selective ultra-high temperature
ceramic absorbers for high-temperature solar plants, J. Renew. Sustain. Energy 4
(3) (2012), 033104, https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4717515.
[187] E. Sani, L. Mercatelli, J.-L. Sans, et al., Porous and dense hafnium and zirconium
ultra-high temperature ceramics for solar receivers, Opt. Mater. 36 (2) (2013)
163–168, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optmat.2013.08.020.
[188] B. Rousseau, S. Guevelou, J. Vicente, et al., Tuning the Spectral Selectivity of Sic￾Based Volumetric Solar Receivers with Ultra-high Temperature Ceramic Coatings,
11th International Symposium on Ceramic Materials and Components for Energy
and Environmental Applications, Canada, Vancouver, BC, 2016.
[189] S. Du, M.-J. Li, Y.-L. He, et al., Conceptual design of porous volumetric solar
receiver using molten salt as heat transfer fluid, Appl. Energy 301 (2021), 117400,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117400.
Y.-L. He et al. Energy Reviews 2 (2023) 100035
22