International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/hmt
A Multi-Zone Unsteady Heat Transfer Model for an Open Volumetric
Air Receiver: A Step Towards Scale-Up and Design Optimization
Vishwa Deepak Kumar a
, Gurveer Singhc
, Laltu Chandra b,∗
, Sudipto Mukhopadhyaya
,
Rajiv Shekhar d
a Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan 342037, India b Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221005, India c University College of Engineering and Technology Bikaner, Rajasthan 334004, India d Indian Institute of Technology (ISM) Dhanbad, Jharkhand 826004, India
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 14 December 2021
Revised 25 February 2022
Accepted 26 February 2022
Available online 5 April 2022
Keywords:
Solar thermal
Open volumetric air receiver
Multi-zone model
Unsteady and steady-state
Scale-up
a b s t r a c t
A comprehensive, multi-zone, unsteady heat transfer model is developed for a straight absorber pore￾based open volumetric air receiver. This includes heat exchange between the porous absorbers, absorbers
and receiver casing, and absorbers and return air. The validation revealed its predictive capability within
an uncertainty of ±7%. The model is used for the scale-up of receiver design with several intermediate
absorber layers. The major recommendations for scale-up are a) multiple absorber layers is beneficial for
mitigating thermal stress, b) higher flux concentration is required for non-volumetric heating, to achieve
the desired air temperature, compared to volumetric heating, c) air return ratio should be 0.6, d) absorber
porosity should be 0.6 for volumetric heating and higher for non-volumetric heating, e) absorber gap to
length ratio should be 0.15 -0.25, f) the radiative heat loss is substantial for non-volumetric heating;
therefore, the exposed surface area to ambient should be reduced, and g) absorber diameter to length
ratio should be 1-2. The developed approach is generic and adaptable for the different open volumetric
air receiver designs.
© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Solar thermal energy (STE) is one of the promising alternatives
for net-zero carbon emissions. Solar tower systems are emerging as
an efficient and viable option to harness the STE. Central receiver￾based solar tower systems generate hot air at a temperature >
700 °C using the open volumetric air receiver (OVAR) [1–3]. The
OVAR comprises porous absorbers that are open to the atmosphere
and are exposed to a Gaussian-type concentrated solar irradiance
by a heliostat field. Air flowing through the OVAR is raised to a
high temperature by the concentrated solar irradiance. The hot air
can be used directly for an application or indirectly to heat a sep￾arate working fluid. The design of the porous absorbers affects the
thermal efficiency of an OVAR and in turn the overall efficiency of
the solar tower system [2]. Different absorber designs, like open￾cell type, foam-type, and monolithic honeycombs have been in-
∗ Corresponding author: Indian Institute of Technology Banaras Hindu University:
Indian Institute of Technology BHU Varanasi, In BHU Campus, Varanasi 221005, In￾dia
E-mail addresses: chandra.mec@iitbhu.ac.in, dr.laltu.chandra@gmail.com (L.
Chandra).
vestigated [4–8]. A recent literature review reported some of the
critical challenges associated with the absorber design e.g. flow in￾stability, thermal stress generation, and dust deposition [9,10]. A
summary of various absorber designs is presented in Table 1. Ex￾perimental investigations [11–18] showed that the OVAR thermal
efficiency depends on the design parameters like absorber geom￾etry, absorber porosity, the mass flow rate of air, air return ra￾tio (ARR), heat flux distribution, flux concentration, and the over￾all receiver design. However, the experimental investigations using
large-scale solar towers are time and cost intensive, and are thus
limited. Therefore, the mathematical or computational models, to
improve and optimize the OVAR design, have been used exten￾sively.
A large body of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations
can be found with varying degrees of complexity. 3D steady-state
CFD investigations using FLUENT, including the Monte Carlo ray
tracing (MCRT) method, are performed for volumetric and non￾volumetric heating of OVAR [21]. This demonstrated a substan￾tial impact of the heat flux distribution on the absorber temper￾ature. Experiment and CFD revealed a substantial increase in the
ARR for cavity, semi-cavity, and secondary-concentrator-type OVAR
[22–25]. The OVAR with gradually varying porosity is studied us￾https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2022.122747
0017-9310/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Nomenclature
A Area, m2
K Loss coefficient, Pa/m
C central absorber
Cp Specific heat, J/kg-K
dpr Diameter of pore, m
dab Diameter of absorber, m
dh Hydraulic diameter, m
DR Diameter of a ring, m
Dcas Diameter of the casing, m
F View factor
G Gap, m
h Convective heat transfer coefficient, W/m2-K
I Irradiance, W/m2
k Thermal conductivity, W/m-K
L Length, m
M intermediate absorber
m˙ Mass flow rate, kg/s
np Number of pores
Nab Total number of absorbers
NR Number of the absorber in ring
Nu Nusselt number
P peripheral absorber
Pr Prandtl number
q˙ Power, W
q˙
cond Rate of heat transfer due to conduction, W
q˙ conv Rate of heat transfer due to convection, W
q˙
rad Rate of heat transfer due to radiation, W
q˙ gen Volumetric heat generation, W/m3
q
in Heat flux, W/m2
Q Volume flow rate, m3/s
r Radius, m
Red_pr Reynolds number based on pore diameter
Ra Rayleigh number
T Temperature, K
Tout Average primary air outlet temperature, K
t Time, s
∀ Volume, m3
z Axial length, m
Subscript
a Air
a_C primary air in the central absorber
a_M primary air in the intermediate absorber
a_P primary air in the peripheral absorber
ab Absorber
atm Ambient
C central absorber
cas Casing
cas-pu casing to peripheral absorber
dh hydraulic diameter
front Front
in Inlet
M intermediate absorber
mu-cu intermediate absorber to central absorber
n number of layers
nat natural
out Outlet
P peripheral absorber
pr Pore
pu-mu peripheral to intermediate
R Ring
r Return
rad radiation
rec Receiver
rC return air through the central region
rM return air through the intermediate region
rP return air through the peripheral region
st Storage
th Thermal
Greek
ε Porosity
 Emissivity
β extinction coefficient
σ Variance
ρ Density
μ dynamic viscosity
θ azimuthal angle
η Efficiency
Abbreviation
ARR Air Return Ratio
DNI Direct Normal Irradiance
mfr Mass Flow Rate
OVAR Open Volumetric Air Receiver
POA Power On Aperture
ing the 3D steady-state CFD simulations [26], and higher thermal
efficiency is reported as compared to a constant porosity absorber.
This study also reported the coefficients, for estimating the pene￾tration depth, for the multi-layer absorbers. 3D CFD study for the
performance estimation of OVAR and its comparison with exper￾imental data for solar tower Jülich is reported in [27]. The study
used appropriate boundary conditions to reduce the computational
mesh size. For the steady-state heat transfer, the thermal efficiency
of 70.9% at 650 °C and thermal efficiency of 75.4% at 450 °C is re￾ported. A 3D CFD model including MCRT, for the thermal-hydraulic
analysis of a porous absorber [28], suggested the use of high poros￾ity. The CFD simulations are also performed for the quarter model
of an OVAR with a glass cover to study the swirling flow through
a varying porous structure [29]. The study reported thermal effi￾ciency of 87% and recommended the use of a layered absorber de￾sign. Optical and thermal analysis of OVAR, by using 3D CFD with
the radiation-based source term [30], found that the coated alu￾mina honeycomb absorber reduces the reflection losses. This in￾creases the outlet air temperature and thermal efficiency of an
OVAR. Several studies have used the local thermal non-equilibrium
(LTNE) model for investigating the heat-transfer processes inside a
porous receiver. For example, the MCRT and LTNE -based 3D CFD
model is used for the steady-state heat transfer analyses of OVAR
in [31]. The work recommended an absorber with high porosity
and small pore size for flux homogenization and high thermal effi￾ciency. A 3D LTNE-based steady-state CFD heat transfer model, in￾cluding heat-flux splitting, was validated with experiments [7,8,40].
The simulations suggested the use of peripheral heating to recipro￾cate the volumetric-type heating effect for the absorbers with high
thermal conductivity. The 3D CFD simulations are valuable in terms
of the insights they provide without requiring large-scale experi￾mental setups. However, in the OVAR there is a wide separation of
length scales, ∼1 mm for the pore size to ∼10 m for the receiver
size, which leads to computationally challenging mesh size [27].
Thus, the computational requirement, for 3D simulations in OVAR,
impedes its scale-up.
For reducing the computational cost, 2D CFD studies for OVAR,
taking advantage of the problem symmetry and physics are also re￾ported. A 2D steady-state CFD analysis for the maximum heat flux
2

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Table 1
The porous absorber designs, material, and operating conditions for the OVARs.
Researcher OVAR Design Material Outlet Temperature (°C)
Böhmer et al. [11] Foil type SiSiC 800
Hoffschmidt et al. [5] Honeycomb (Hexagonal) SiC 840
Sharma et al. [8] Circular (straight pores) Brass 350-360
Avila-Marin et al. [12] Wire mesh (Gradual porosity) Alloy 650
Pabst et al. [13] Honeycomb (Hexagonal) Metal 700-800
Avila-Marin et al. [14] Graded mesh Metal >780
Du et al. [15,16] Radially graded (Foam) SiC >660
Li et al. [19] Honeycomb Ceramic 550-575
Heisel et al. [20] Various 3-D printed SiC 860
of 2200 kW/m2, performed with a SiC absorber having a porosity
of 49.5% and wire-mesh alloy absorbers having a porosity of 97.4%,
showed a deviation of about 10% with experiments [33]. The alloy￾based absorber showed a greater thermal homogeneity in compar￾ison to the SiC absorber, which is attributed to the higher porosity.
A 2D, coupled, heat transfer model with MCRT is used to study the
windowed volumetric receiver [34]. The LTNE effects are also con￾sidered in this work, and the thermal efficiency is investigated by
varying cell size and porosity range.
The 1D simulations for OVARs are widely reported in the lit￾erature and are useful, as reliable results can be obtained with
the least computational effort. Numerical investigation, including
the 1D radiation transport equation (RTE), demonstrated the con￾ditional airflow instability in OVAR [35] and concluded that the
volumetric heating for an absorber may be achieved with an ap￾propriate design. 1D analysis revealed the suppressed flow stability
for the brass-based circular absorbers with straight pores [8,36,37].
The 1D analysis also revealed that the airflow resistance increases
substantially with temperature and limits the concentrated solar
irradiance onto porous absorbers [38]. Ray-tracing-based solar irra￾diance and radiation-based heat loss, in the 1D approach, are also
developed for the thermal performance assessment of OVAR [39].
A direct positive correlation between foam-type absorber porosity
and thermal efficiency of OVAR is developed using a 1D numeri￾cal model [40]. A coupled 1D heat transfer model was developed,
including radiation exchange from the exposed absorber surface to
the ambient, for the assessment of OVAR [41]. The study reported
a high thermal efficiency for low inlet velocity and high thermal
conductivity of the absorber material. A 1D numerical heat trans￾fer model was presented for a solar receiver with a variable aper￾ture mechanism in [42]. Various numerical models, developed at
the German Aerospace Center (DLR), accounting for both the de￾tailed and homogeneous representation of the absorber, are pre￾sented in [43]. This study reported a discrepancy between experi￾mental and numerical results for temperature profiles in solid and
fluid phases, as well as the efficiency. The literature survey re￾vealed the predictive capability of the 1D models and underlines
the need for a comprehensive, unsteady, heat transfer model ben￾efitting from the insight and limitations of the unsteady state (1D)
and steady-state (CFD) models, including all the modes of heat ex￾change a) between absorbers, b) between absorbers and return air,
c) between absorber and receiver casing, and d) between absorbers
and atmosphere. This is necessary for the scale-up, operation, and
optimization of OVAR designs.
As a first step, a peripherally and centrally located absorbers￾based two-zone, unsteady, heat transfer model was developed for
an OVAR [44]. The novelty of the current work is the development
of a multi-zone model for OVARs with several intermediate ab￾sorber layers, in addition to central and peripheral absorbers. To
the best of the author’s knowledge, such a detailed model is not
yet reported for a realistic OVAR design. The framed objectives of
the present work are as follows:
a. Development of a multi-zone, unsteady, heat transfer model for
OVAR including all the modes of heat exchange between ab￾sorbers, absorbers and return air, absorbers and receiver casing.
The model also considers the radially-axially varying heat flux
on the porous absorbers.
b. Parametric investigation of the OVAR designs, with several ab￾sorber layers, to identify the important parameters for scale-up.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the math￾ematical model, Section 3 presents results and discussions, and
finally, the conclusions and recommendations are presented in
Section 4.
2. Mathematical Modeling
In this section, a) the layout of scale-up OVAR designs with
multiple intermediate absorber layers is presented, and b) the gov￾erning equations are deduced, for different receiver internals and
airflow paths, along with the corresponding boundary conditions.
The developed model will enable the scale-up of an OVAR design
for a given operating condition.
2.1. Problem Description
A large field of heliostats is used to concentrate the direct so￾lar radiation onto an OVAR, which comprises several absorber lay￾ers (see Fig. 1a). In this schematic, the absorbers are identified
as Central (C), intermediate (M), and peripheral (P). Because of
Gaussian-type flux distribution on the OVAR aperture, the central
absorbers are exposed to the highest heat flux, intermediate ab￾sorbers are exposed to the intermediate heat flux, and the pe￾ripheral absorbers are exposed to the lowest heat flux. Therefore,
the reported two-zone model [44] is extended, including the in￾termediate absorber layers, and is termed the multi-zone model.
This model assumes a) incompressible airflow, b) absorbers of
uniform length and porosity, and c) straight absorber pores. The
straight absorber pore design was preferred for mitigating the se￾rious problem of dust deposition in an absorber with complex
porous structures [45,46]. The model requires, for instance, the
absorber diameter (dab), the absorber length (L), the number of
absorbers (NR), the ring diameter (DR), and the gap between ab￾sorbers (G) (see Fig. 1b). Here, the ring diameter for the first ab￾sorber layer is DR1 = 2dab + 2G and for the nth absorber layer
is DRn = DRn−1 + (2dab + 2G) (see Fig. 1c). The number of ab￾sorbers for the nth layer, NRn = πDRn/(dab + G) -1, is used for the
symmetry with an absorber azimuthal location θR = 360◦/NRn (see
Fig. 1d and 1e). The inner diameter of the receiver casing is given
by Dcas = DRn−1 + G + dab. All the absorbers are assumed to have
the same number of pores (np) with diameter dpr. The developed
model offers flexibility to these parameters, and thus adaptable for
the different OVAR designs. The z-direction of airflow, inside and
outside of the absorbers, is depicted using solid and dotted arrows
3

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 1. The schematic showing the a) circular arrangement, b) absorbers in the first ring, c) location of the rings, d) the angle between two absorbers, e) symmetry, f and g)
the path and direction for primary airflow inside an absorber and the return airflow around the absorber.
(see Fig. 1f and g). These figures depict the flow path of primary
air, which is a mixture of return air and ambient air, and return
air around the absorbers. It may be noted that the direction of pri￾mary air and return air flow are opposite to each other. The hot
primary air at the OVAR outlet flows through thermal energy stor￾age or an application. There, the heat from primary air is recovered
and the relatively cooled, return air, enters the OVAR for external
cooling and temperature redistribution of absorbers. The hot air
from the absorber outlet flows through the nozzle-shaped mixture
assembly to provide a uniform, high-temperature, hot air at the
OVAR outlet [7,8,32]. The entire OVAR assembly is well-insulated,
externally, for mitigating heat loss to the ambient.
The literature review reveals that the porous absorbers are
heated volumetrically or non-volumetrically. In-house experiments
and CFD simulations revealed that the volumetric (uniform) ab￾sorption of heat in the absorbers promotes the desired volumetric
heating for an OVAR [7,8,32]. Hence, internal heating of absorbers
is applied for simulating volumetric heating (see Fig. 2a). This led
4

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 2. Schematic showing (a) volumetric heating of an absorber, (b, c) Gaussian-type irradiance onto an absorber, and heat flux variation inside of an absorber for non￾volumetric heating.
to the lowest absorber surface temperature at the inlet, z/L = 0
and the highest absorber surface temperature at the outlet, z/L = 1
[62]. The heliostat field concentrates the beam solar radiation onto
the OVAR aperture. A part of this concentrated irradiance, falling
onto the front surface of an absorber, follows a non-homogeneous,
radial, Gaussian-type distribution [47,48]. The remaining part en￾ters through the absorber pore and is internally absorbed. There￾fore, the non-volumetric heating is simulated by (a) Gaussian-type
irradiance onto the front surface of an absorber is shown in Fig. 2b,
and (b) the decreasing flux inside of an absorber pore, along the z￾direction, is shown in Fig. 2c. This leads to the highest absorber
temperature at the inlet, z/L = 0 and the lowest absorber surface
temperature at the outlet, z/L=1. Therefore, non-volumetric heating
leads to a higher heat loss from the absorber surface compared to
volumetric heating. The radial and axial variations of irradiance are
calculated as follows [6]:
I(rrec ) = I0.exp−1
2 .
rrec2
σ 2
 (1)
I(z) = Ioe−β.z (2)
Where Io is the maximum heat flux at rrec = 0, β = 3(1-ε)/dpr
[49] is the estimated extinction coefficient, ε is the absorber poros￾ity, and dpr is the pore diameter for an absorber. The multi-zone
model includes several intermediate absorber layers between cen￾tral and peripheral absorbers. The absorber layouts for one, two,
and three intermediate absorber layers are illustrated in Fig. 3. The
total number of absorbers Nab in an OVAR is 19 for the one inter￾mediate absorber layer and 61 for the three intermediate absorber
layers. The actual number of intermediate absorber layers will de￾pend upon the capacity of an OVAR design.
To scale up an OVAR design, with multiple intermediate ab￾sorber layers and for a given air mass flow rate (m˙ a), the ab￾sorber diameter, the absorber porosity, and the Reynolds number
based on pore diameter are maintained. This allows a compara￾tive assessment between the different OVAR designs for optimiza￾tion. The air mass flow rate through one absorber will be m˙ ab =
m˙ a/Nab, the air mass flow rate through a single pore is m˙ pr =
m˙ ab/np, where np is the total number of pores in an absorber.
Thus, the Reynolds number based on pore diameter Red_pr is
given by,
Red_pr = 4 m˙ a
πdpr μ Nab.np (3)
Here, the pore diameter (dpr) is to be selected to obtain the de￾sired Red_pr and is given by,
dpr = 4
πμ Red_pr
m˙ a
Nab.np (4)
Now, for a given absorber porosity (ε) the absorber diameter is
given by,
dab =

1
ε.np 4
πμ Red_pr
m˙ a
Nab2
1/2
. (5)
Eq. (5) provides the required absorber diameter for different in￾termediate absorber layers.
2.2. Governing equations
The differential form of the governing equations is derived for
the receiver casing, the central absorbers, the intermediate ab￾sorbers, the peripheral absorbers, and the return air side, consid￾ering the 60 ° symmetry of an OVAR design (see Fig. 4a). A differ￾ential element (dz) along the main flow (z) direction is shown in
Fig. 4b. Here, the absorbers are highlighted as C, M, and P depend￾ing on their relative positions in an OVAR. All the modes of heat
transfer, including the interaction between different receiver inter￾nals, are depicted using Fig. 4c. This reveals the involved complex
heat transfer processes, which are mathematically modeled, and
the same is presented subsequently. In this paper, one intermedi￾ate absorber layer is used to illustrate the model development. For
several intermediate absorber layers, the corresponding equation is
to be solved repeatedly with appropriate view factors.
2.2.1. Receiver casing
The receiver casing encloses all the porous absorbers and is ex￾ternally insulated. This arrangement mitigates heat loss from the
circumference of the absorber to the ambient. The heat transfer
modeling of the receiver casing excludes a) the direct solar irra￾diance and b) the direct radiation exchanges with the central (C)
and intermediate (M) absorbers on account of the small gap be￾tween absorbers. The model includes the radiative and convective
heat exchanges with the peripheral absorbers (P) and the return air
(see Fig. 5). The return air flows through the space between the re￾ceiver casing and P. In this figure, q˙ conv_rp denotes the rate of con￾vective heat transfer from casing to return air, q˙
cond_z denotes the
rate of heat conduction in the receiver casing at z, and q˙
rad (cas↔P)
denotes the net radiative heat exchange between the receiver cas￾ing and P.
5

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 3. Front view of an open volumetric air receiver with a) one, b) two, and c) three intermediate absorber layers.
Fig. 4. A schematic showing, a) 60 ° symmetry of an OVAR design and b) the differential element along the z-direction and c) all the modes of heat transfer in absorber.
Fig. 5. A schematic showing the heat exchanges between the receiver casing, and the peripheral absorbers and the return air.
6

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 6. A schematic showing the cross-section of a porous absorber and the impor￾tant geometrical parameters.
Fig. 7. A schematic showing the different modes of heat transfer to and from the
peripheral absorbers (P).
The instantaneous energy balance, q˙ in − q˙ out = q˙ st, results in
the following expression:
kcas
ρcascpcas
∂2Tcas
∂z2
  	 conduction term
− 2hrcas rcasin
ρcascpcas

r2
casout − r2
casin  (Tcas − Trp)
  	 convection term
+ σ


T 4
P − T 4
cas
ρcascpcas
 1−cas
cas  3(r2
cas_out−r2
cas_in ) rcas_in + 3(r2
cas_out−r2
cas_in ) rcas_inFcas−pu + 
 1−P
P
 (r2
cas_out−r2
cas_in ) 2rab 
  	 radiation exchenge term
= ∂Tcas
∂t   	 storage term
(6)
In Eq. (6) the conduction, convection, and radiation exchange
related terms are identified for the receiver casing. The prescribed
initial condition (at t = 0) is Tcas = Tatm. The prescribed boundary
conditions at the inlet and outlet are as follows:
Inlet (at z = 0) : kcas
∂Tcas
∂z = σcas

T 4
cas − T 4
atm
Outlet (at z = L) :
∂Tcas
∂z = 0.
2.2.2. Absorber
A porous absorber is depicted using the schematic in Fig. 6. The
important geometrical parameters like pore diameter, and absorber
diameter, are depicted in this figure. Depending on the locations,
the absorbers in an OVAR are identified as peripheral (P), inter￾mediate (M), and central (C) in Fig. 4. The unsteady heat transfer
modeling for these absorbers is described subsequently. The pri￾mary air flows inside the pores of these absorbers. The return air
flows around the absorber in between the narrow gaps.
2.2.2.1. Peripheral absorber. The modes of heat transfer to and from
P are depicted in Fig. 7. These absorbers interact with the receiver
casing, M, and the return air around these absorbers. The rate of
heat transfer, via forced convection, from P to primary air is given
by q˙ conv_ap, the rate of heat transfer, via forced convection, from
P to return air is given by q˙ conv_rp, the rate of heat transfer due
to conduction at z is given by q˙
cond_z, the net radiation-based heat
exchange between P and the receiver casing is given by q˙
rad (cas↔P),
and the net heat radiation-based heat exchange between P and M
is given by q˙
rad (M↔P).
The instantaneous energy balance gives,
kP
ρPcpP
∂2TP
∂z2
  	 conduction term
− 2haPnp.rpr
ρPcpP (1 − ε)r2
ab
(TP − Ta_P )
  	 convection term f rom P to primary air
− 2hrp
ρPcpP (1 − ε)rab
(TP − TrP )
  	 convection term f rom P to return−air
+
σ


T 4
cas − T 4
P

ρPcpP

 1−P
P

(1 − ε)rab + (1−ε)rab
Fpu−cas + 
 1−cas
cas  6(1−ε)r2
ab
rcas_i

  	 radiation exchange term between P and casing
+
σ


T 4
M − T 4
P

ρPcpP

 1−P
P

(1 − ε)rab + (1−ε)rab
Fpu−mu + 
 1−M
M

(1 − ε)2rab
  	 radiation exchange term between P and M
+ q˙ p
ρPcpPd∀P   	 heat input term
= ∂TP
∂t
	 unsteady term
(7)
Here, the heat source to P for volumetric and non-volumetric
heating is given as follows:
q˙ p =

q˙ gen.d∀P f or volumetric heating
q
in−P.dAPs f or non − volumetric heating
For simulating the volumetric heating, for instance using the
peripheral heating in the laboratory [7,8], the uniform internal heat
generation (q˙ gen) is applied. For the non-volumetric heating, with
concentrated solar radiation on the field, the heat flux q
in−p (e.g.
I(r)) is applied on the front surface and the distribution I(z) is ap￾plied along the axial direction. The prescribed initial and boundary
conditions are as follows:
Initial condition: The temperature of the peripheral absorber is
equal to the ambient, i.e., at t = 0 TP = Tatm.
Boundary conditions: The boundary conditions, for volumetric
and non-volumetric heating, are applied at the inlet (z = 0) and
the outlet (z = L) to the absorber. These are as follows: a) at z=0:
kP
∂TP
∂z   	 conduction term
= σP (T 4
P − T 4
atm)   	 radiation exchange between P and atmosphere
+ h(TP − Tatm)   	 convection term
for the volumetric heating, and
−k
∂TP
∂z   	 conduction term
= q
in−p   	 input heat flux
− σP (T 4
P − T 4
atm)   	 radiation exchange between P and atmosphere
−h(TP − Tatm)   	 convection term
for the non-volumetric heating, and b) the outlet is treated as adi￾abatic, considering the externally insulated absorbers, i.e. at z = L:
∂TP
∂z = 0. The absorbers are internally (volumetrically) heated for
simulating the volumetric heating effect. Therefore, the heat flux
term is not included as the inlet boundary condition for volumet￾ric heating.
2.2.2.2. Intermediate absorber. The multi-zone model includes the
heat transfer in M, which is located in between P and C (Fig. 4).
Thus, M interacts with P, C, and the return air. The direct radiation
7

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 8. A schematic showing the modes of heat transfer to and from an intermedi￾ate absorber (M).
exchange between M and receiver casing is neglected, assuming
the small gaps between the absorbers. The different modes of heat
exchange to and from M are depicted in Fig. 8. In this figure, the
rate of heat transfer, via forced convection, from M to primary air
is q˙ conv_am, the rate of heat transfer, via forced convection, from M
to the return air is q˙ conv_rm, the rate of heat conduction in M at
an axial position z is q˙
cond_z, the net radiation-based heat exchange
between M and P is q˙
rad (P↔M) and between M and C is q˙
rad (M↔C).
The instantaneous energy balance for M is given by,
kM
ρMcpM
∂2TM
∂z2
  	 conduction term
− 2haM nMrpr
ρMcpM(1 − ε)r2
ab
(TM − TaM )
  	 convection term f rom M to primary air
− 2hrM
ρMcpM(1 − ε)rab
(TM − TrM )
  	 convection term f rom M to return−air
+
σ


T 4
P − T 4
M

ρMcpM

 1−M
M

(1 − ε)rab + (1−ε)rabs
Fmu−pu + 
 1−M
M
 (1−ε)rab
2

  	 radiation exchange term between P and M
+
σ


T 4
C − T 4
M

ρMcpM

 1−M
M

(1 − ε)rab + (1−ε)rab
Fmu−cu + 
 1−M
M

3(1 − ε)rab
  	 radiation exchange term between C and M
+ q˙ M
ρMcpMd∀M   	 heat input term
= ∂TM
∂t
	 unsteady term
(8)
The heat source to M, for volumetric and non-volumetric heat￾ing, is as follows:
q˙ M =

q˙ gend∀M f or volumetric heating
q
in−M.dAMs f or non − volumetric heating
Here, the volumetric heating is simulated using the uniform,
internal, heat generation and the non-volumetric heating is sim￾ulated by using the radial and axial variation of heat-flux on the
absorber. The prescribed initial and boundary conditions are as fol￾lows:
Initial condition: The temperature of the intermediate absorber
is equal to ambient i.e. at t = 0, TM = Tatm.
Boundary conditions: The prescribed boundary conditions are
a) at the inlet (z = 0):
kM
∂TM
∂z   	 conduction term
= σM(T 4
M − T 4
atm)   	 radiation exchange between M and atmosphere
+ h(TM − Tatm)   	 convection term
for volumetric heating and
−kM
∂TM
∂z   	 conduction term
= q
in−m 	 input heat f lux
− σM(T 4
M − T 4
atm)   	 radiation exchange between M and atmosphere
−h(TM − Tatm)   	 convective term
for non-volumetric heating, and b) at the outlet, considering the
external insulation, the adiabatic boundary condition is applied i.e.
at z = L, ∂TM
∂z = 0.
2.2.2.3. Central absorber. The absorber located at the center is
termed the central absorber (C). This absorber exchanges heat with
M, the primary air, and the return air. Fig. 9 shows the different
modes of heat exchange for C. The rate of heat transfer, via forced
convection, from C to primary air is given by q˙ conv_ac, the rate of
heat transfer, via forced convection, from C to return air is given by
q˙ conv_rc, the net radiation-based heat exchange between C and M is
given by q˙
rad (C↔M). Here, the direct interaction between C and P
is ignored considering the presence of M and small gaps between
absorbers.
The instantaneous energy balance gives,
kC
ρCcpC
∂2TCabs
∂z2
  	 conduction term
− 2haCncrpr
ρCcpC (1 − ε)r2
ab
(TC − Ta_C )
  	 convection term f rom C to primary air
− 2hrC
ρCcpC (1 − ε)rab
(TC − TrC )
  	 convection term f rom C to return−air
+
σ


T 4
C − T 4
M

ρCcpC

 1−C
C
 (1−ε)rab
2 + (1−ε)rab
2Fcu−mu + 
 1−C
C
 (1−ε)rab
6

  	 radiation exchange term between C and M
+ q˙C
ρCcpCd∀C   	 heat input term
= ∂TC
∂t
	 unsteady term
(9)
As in P and M, the heat input, for volumetric and non￾volumetric heating, is as follows:
Here, q˙C =

q˙ gend∀C f or volumetric heating
q
in−C.dACs f or non − volumetric heating
The prescribed initial and boundary conditions for solving this
partial differential Eq. (9) are as follows:
Initial condition: The temperature of the central absorber is
equal to ambient i.e. at t = 0, TC = Tatm.
Boundary conditions: The boundary conditions are prescribed
at the inlet and the outlet. These are as follows: a) at the inlet
z = 0,
kC
∂TC
∂z   	 conduction term
= σC (T 4
C − T 4
atm)   	 radiation exchange between C and atmosphere
+ h(TC − Tatm)   	 convection term
for volumetric heating and
−kC
∂TC
∂z   	 conduction term
= q
in−c 	
input heat f lux
− σC (T 4
C − T 4
atm)   	 radiation exchange between C and atmosphere
−h(TC − Tatm)   	 convection term
for non-volumetric heating, and b) at the outlet, considering ex￾ternal insulation, the adiabatic condition is applied, i.e. at z = L,
∂TC
∂z = 0.
2.2.3. Primary air
The primary air, a mixture of ambient and return air, flows in￾side the pores of an absorber. This leads to heat removal from the
absorbers or heating of the primary air via forced convection. The
heat transfer to primary air is identical for all the absorbers viz. P,
M, and C. Therefore, one of the absorbers, namely P, is selected to
8

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 9. A schematic showing the different modes of heat transfer to and from the central absorber (C).
Fig. 10. Schematic showing heat transfer to and from primary air at peripheral absorber (P).
deduce the heat transfer model for primary air (see Fig. 10). The
rate of heat transfer due to the advection of primary air at z is
given by m˙ acpaTa|z, the rate of heat transfer due to conduction at
z is given by q˙
cond_z and at z+dz is q˙
cond_z+dz, and the rate of heat
transfer, via forced convection, from an absorber to primary air is
given by q˙ conv_ap.
The instantaneous energy balance, for primary airflow inside P,
gives,
kap
ρapcpap
∂2Ta_P
∂z2
  	 conduction term
− m˙ a_p
2nπr2
prρap
∂Ta_P
∂z   	 advection term in primary air
+
2ha_p
ρapcpaprpr
(TP − Ta_P )
  	 convection term f rom P to primary air
= ∂Ta_P
∂t   	 unsteady term
(10)
The identical equations can be deduced for primary airflow in￾side the pores of intermediate and central absorbers. Thus, the
same is not repeated without the loss of generality. The prescribed
initial and boundary condition for solving Eq. (10) are as follows:
Initial condition: The temperature of primary is equal to the am￾bient i.e. at t = 0; Ta_P = Tatm.
Boundary conditions: These are to be specified at the inlet and
outlet to an absorber. During the operation of an OVAR the am￾bient air mixed with the return air at the inlet. Therefore, the
conservation of energy provides at z = 0, Ta_P = ARR × TrP|z=0 +
(1 − ARR)Tatm. At the outlet, considering external insulation, the
adiabatic condition is applied, i.e. at z = L, ∂Ta_P
∂z = 0. Generally,
the experiments were used to estimate the ARR for an OVAR de￾sign see e.g. [5,22,50–52]. These investigations reveal that ARR de￾pends on several parameters such as absorber and receiver design,
air mass flow rate and temperature, and ambient conditions.
For identical designs of P, M and C, the heat transfer coeffi￾cient for primary airflow are estimated using the Reynolds number
based on pore diameter (Red_pr) [53]:
Nua = 4.36 +
0.086

Red_prPr d
L
1.33
1 + 0.1Pr

Red_pr
d
L
1.33 (11)
For non-identical absorbers, the above expression can be easily
adapted. Thus, the developed approach is generic, and the model
is adaptable for the different OVAR designs.
2.2.4. Return air
The hot primary air is allowed to flow through thermal energy
storage (TES) or an application, like solar convective furnace. Here
Fig. 11. Schematic showing the return airflow, through the different regions, for one
intermediate absorber layer.
the energy from primary air is recovered, and the resulting, rel￾atively cooled, return air is introduced around the C, M, and P
through the return air flow chamber. The return air is used for the
cooling and redistribution of heat among the absorbers for thermal
uniformity. The direction of return airflow is opposite to that of the
primary airflow (see Fig. 1f and g). For heat transfer modeling with
return air, the identified central region, intermediate region and
peripheral region, consistent with the absorbers, are depicted in
Fig. 11. The return air flowing through the peripheral region inter￾acts with the casing and P. The return air flowing through the in￾termediate region interacts with M. The return air flowing through
the central region interacts with C. Thus, the identified mutually
exclusive regions, using the smallest gap between absorbers as in
[44], reduce the model complexity to some extent. The inlet return
air temperature at z/L=1 is maintained at 300 K for all the simu￾lations, except for the parametric investigation to analyze its effect
on the performance of an OVAR. At the absorber inlet, return air
coming out of the OVAR is mixed with the ambient air as shown
in Fig. 1g. This serves as the primary air (P) for the OVAR, which
flows through the pores of an absorber. A 3D CFD analysis for re￾turn airflow revealed the presence of cross-flow and vortex around
the absorbers, which promotes the mixing of return air with am￾bient air, and the same was inferred from the experimental data
[7,8]. The mixing of ambient and return air is modelled with the
inlet boundary condition for the primary air and is described in
the Section 2.2.3. For an incompressible flow of return air in these
9

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 12. A schematic showing heat transfer for the return air flowing through the peripheral region.
Fig. 13. A schematic showing heat transfer for the return air flowing through the intermediate region.
three regions, the mass flow rate should satisfy the following:
m˙ rP
ArP
= m˙ rM
ArM
= m˙ rC
ArC
. (12)
The Reynolds number (Redh), based on the hydraulic diameter
of central, intermediate, and peripheral regions, will be different.
Therefore, unlike the primary air, the heat transfer modeling for
return air will be different for the different regions. Hence, the
governing equations are derived for the same. These are described
subsequently.
2.2.4.1. Return airflow through the peripheral region. The different
modes of heat exchange, for return air flowing through the periph￾eral region, are depicted in Fig. 12. Here, q˙ conv_rP denotes the rate of
convective heat transfer with the peripheral absorbers, q˙ conv_r−cas
denotes the convective heat transfer with the casing, and q˙
cond,z
denotes the rate of heat conduction at z for the adopted coordi￾nate system. The rate of heat transfer by advection at z is denoted
by m˙ rPcprPTrP|z. It may be noted that the return airflow along the
z-direction and is depicted by an arrow.
The instantaneous energy balance gives,
krP
ρrPcprP
∂2TrP
∂z2
  	 conduction term
+
m˙ rP
ρrPArP
∂TrP
∂z   	 advection term in return air
+
4πhrPrab
ρrPcprPArP
(TP − TrP )
  	 convection term f rom P to return-air
+
2πhrcasrcas_i
3ρrPcprPArP
(TCas − TrP )
  	 convection term f rom cas to return−air
= ∂TrP
∂t
	 unsteady term
(13)
The required initial and boundary conditions for solving the
Eq. (13) are as follows:
Initial condition: The return air temperature in the periphery re￾gion is the same as ambient i.e. at t = 0, TrP = Tatm
Boundary conditions: The defined boundary conditions at the re￾turn air inlet z = L is TrP = Tatm and at the return air outlet z = 0
is ∂TrP
∂z = 0.
2.2.4.2. Return airflow through the intermediate region. The return
air flowing through the intermediate region interacts with M and
the modes of heat transfer are illustrated in Fig. 13. Here, q˙ conv_rM
depicts the convective heat transfer from M to the return air. The
other symbolic representations for conduction and advection are
already described.
The instantaneous energy balance gives,
krM
ρrMcprM
∂2TrM
∂z2
  	 conduction term
+
m˙ rM
ρrMArM
∂TrM
∂z   	 advection term in return air
+
2πhrMrab
ρrMcprMArM
(TM − TrM )
  	 convection term f rom M to return-air
= ∂TrM
∂t 	 unsteady term
(14)
Initial condition: at t = 0 is TrM = Tatm.
Boundary conditions: at z = L is TrM = Tatm and at z = L is ∂TrM
∂z =
0.
2.2.4.3. Return airflow through the central region. The modes of
heat transfer for the return air flowing through the central region
are shown in Fig. 14. Here, q˙ conv_rC represents the convective heat
transfer from the central absorber to the return air.
The instantaneous energy balance gives,
krC
ρrCcprC
∂2TrC
∂z2
  	 conduction term
+
m˙ rC
ρrCArC
∂TrC
∂z   	 advection term in return air
+
πhrCrab
3ρrCcprCArC
(TC − TrC )
  	 convection term f rom C to return−air
= ∂TrC
∂t
	 unsteady term
(15)
Initial condition: Initially the temperature of return air in the
central region is equal to ambient temperature.
At t=0; TrC = Tatm
Boundary condition: The temperature of return air in its inlet i.e.
at z=L is ambient. At the outlet of the central region i.e. z=0, the
adiabatic boundary condition is considered.
At z=L; TrC = Tatm
At z=0; ∂TrC
∂z = 0
The required heat transfer coefficient for return air flowing
around the P, M, and C are computed using Redhr = dhr∗m˙ r
Ar μ [54] and
is as follows:
Nur = 0.345 ∗ Re0.597
dhr . (16)
Here, the convective heat transfer coefficient hr = Nur(kr/dhr)
for the return air.
10

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 14. A schematic showing heat transfer for the return air flowing through the central region.
Fig. 15. The computed primary air temperature at the outlet of P at 5000 seconds for different a) grid sizes and b) time steps.
2.3. Grid Independence test and validation
A laboratory experiment for an OVAR design [7,8], with one
central absorber C and six peripheral absorbers P having 52%
porosity, is selected for the grid independence test and validation
of the developed 1D multi-zone model. The experimental condi￾tions are input power q˙ = 1500 W, air mass flow rate m˙ a= 0.005
kg/s, and the air return ratio ARR = 0.6 [44] obtained using the
detailed air temperature measurement. Calculations are performed
with different grid sizes (z) and time steps (t), and the ob￾tained values at 5000 seconds are shown in Fig. 15. The computed
values for the primary air temperature at the outlet of P (Tap) at
5000 seconds, for 0.0004 m≤ z ≤ 0.0016 m and t = 1 s, are
867.20 K ≤Tap≤ 867.33 K and the percentage relative variation is ≤
0.02 %. Thus, z = 0.0004 m is selected for the time-independence
test. Subsequently, the different time-steps (1 s ≤ t ≤ 10 s) are
considered for z = 0.0004 m and the computed values for Tap at
5000 seconds are 867.07 K ≤Tap≤ 867.33 K and the relative per￾centage variation ≤ 0.019 % for t = 1 s. Therefore, a time-step
t = 1 s is selected for further simulations.
Fig. 16a shows a comparison between the computed and the
measured primary air temperature at the outlet of C and P. The
measured, time-dependent, inlet air temperature is used as a
boundary condition for primary air. The comparison also reveals
that the transient heating of primary air up to 300 seconds and
the subsequent steady-state up to 2400 seconds are reproduced
fairly well. Furthermore, the average values of measured primary
air temperature at the outlet for all the 7 absorbers, at a time in￾terval of 250 seconds, are compared with the computed values in
Fig. 16b. This shows that the deviations between the measured and
computed average values are well within the experimental uncer￾tainty of about ±7%. The highest and lowest deviations are 14 °C at
750 seconds and 7 °C at 250 seconds, respectively. Further analy￾ses for a smaller time interval revealed that the computed and ex￾perimental data are within the same uncertainty range. Moreover,
Fig. 16c revealed that the computed, steady-state, axially varying,
primary air temperature for C is consistent with the reported two￾zone model with one C and six P [44]. The multi-zone model is
now applied for the design assessment and scale-up of an OVAR
design [7,8] with several intermediate absorber layers. Here, the
estimated ARR = 0.6 for the selected OVAR design, from the lab￾oratory experiments, is adopted. Furthermore, a parametric inves￾tigation is performed for a wide-range of ARR (0.3-0.8) to deter￾mine its effect on the performance of scale-up OVAR. These are
presented subsequently.
3. Results and Discussions
This section reports the assessment of scale-up OVAR designs
with one, two, and three intermediate absorber layers (Fig. 3) for
a given total air mass flow rate m˙ a = 0.966 kg/s through OVAR
and input power q˙ = 0.58 MW or q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ/kg. The selection
of these parameters is motivated by the heat treatment inside a
retrofitted solar convective furnace [55]. An absorber with diame￾ter dab = 0.3292 m, length L = 0.3292 m and porosity ε = 0.52 is
selected based on the preliminary design analyses with one, two,
or three intermediate absorber layers. In the analyses, the Reynolds
number based on pore diameter (Red_pr) is maintained. These de￾tails are summarized in Table 2, which depicts that the number
of straight pores increases substantially from 242 for the three in￾termediate absorber layers to 2500 for the one intermediate ab￾sorber layer. In other words, having several intermediate absorber
layers seems more realistic than a single layer for fabrication. How￾ever, this will enhance the exposed front surface area of the ab￾sorbers to ambient and thus the heat losses. Therefore, a care￾ful assessment of the OVAR designs is necessary for optimization.
Considering such aspects, this section reports the effect of a) num￾ber of intermediate absorber layers, b) gap between absorbers, c)
absorber length, d) volumetric and non-volumetric heating, e) ab￾sorber porosity and f) air return ratio on the thermal efficiency of
OVAR.
Assuming that the entrance length is much smaller than the
absorber pore length, the pressure drop across a straight, circular,
pore is estimated using the following equation for laminar flow at
11

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 16. A comparison between the computed and the measured [7,8] (a) primary air temperature at the outlet for C and P, b) average primary air temperature values for
all the absorbers at a time interval of 250 seconds, c) comparison of computed temperature between present and two-zone model as in Singh et al. [43].
Table 2
The selected absorber parameters, to maintain, Red_pr, for the different numbers of intermediate absorber layers.
Number of Intermediate absorber layers m˙ a(kg/s) Nab dab (m) Dcas (m) m˙ abs = m˙ a/Nab(kg/s) np dpr (m) Red_pr
One 0.966 19 0.3292 2.536 0.0508 2500 0.0047 86
Two 0.966 37 0.3292 3.458 0.0261 660 0.0091 86
Three 0.966 61 0.3292 4.380 0.0158 242 0.0151 86
a small Redpr = 86 [56]:
ptotal = Kin
Q2
pr
2gA2
  	 sudden contraction
+
128μLQpr
d4
pr   	 f or a straight pore
+ Kout
Q2
pr
2gA2
  	 sudden expansion
(17)
Here, ptotal is the total pressure drop across a straight pore,
Qpr is the volume flow rate in a single pore, Kin and Kout are the
loss coefficients, based on entrance and exit diameter ratio, and
are equal to 0.24 [56]. The calculated values in Fig. 17 depict the
highest pressure drop for the absorber design with 3 intermedi￾ate layers and the lowest pressure drop for the absorber design
with 1 intermediate layer. Generally, these pressure-drop values
are much smaller than that of the complex porous form type ab￾sorbers [10], and decrease exponentially for dab/L up to 1 and then
rather slowly. Therefore, selecting dab/L ≥1 will be preferred and
pre-assessment of pressure-drop is recommended for the continu￾ous operation of OVAR.
Fig. 17. Pressure drop in pore with respect to dab/L.
3.1. Volumetric heating
The ambient air mixed with return air enters the absorber
pores as primary air and gains the heat from volumetrically heated
12

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 18. Time-dependent primary air temperature at the outlet of C, M and P for a) one intermediate absorber layer, b) two intermediate absorber layers and c) three
intermediate absorber layers for volumetric heating.
absorbers, and leaves through the absorber outlets. The time￾dependent, average, primary air temperature at the outlet of C, M,
and P is shown in Fig. 18. In the provided legends, T_a stands for
air temperature and the second subscript, c, m, and p, stands for
central, intermediate, and peripheral absorbers. Following may be
inferred:
a. for one intermediate absorber layer, the air temperature in￾creases rapidly from 300 K to 850 K up to 2000 seconds and
gradually increases up to 870 - 875 K until 4000 seconds at
the steady-state.
b. for two intermediate absorber layers (m1 and m2), the air tem￾perature rapidly increases, from 300 K to 830 K for C and M
and from 300 K to 800 K for P, up to 4000 seconds. There￾fore, the rate of temperature rise decreases with the increas￾ing number of intermediate absorber layers. This is attributed
to the elevated heat loss from the exposed, front, surface area
of absorbers. Subsequently, the primary air temperature attains
840-875 K at the steady-state around 6000 seconds.
c. for three intermediate absorber layers (m1, m2, and m3), the
air temperature gradually increases from 300 K to 830 K un￾til 8000 seconds. This is consistent with the findings from one
and two intermediate absorber layers-based simulations. Hence,
it may be concluded that the use of several intermediate ab￾sorber layers (M) benefits from a lower surface temperature,
however, for a higher heat loss. This aspect will be investigated
at a greater depth at a later stage.
The axial variations for absorbers and primary air temperatures,
from the inlet (z/L = 0) to the outlet (z/L = 1) for the absorbers,
are provided in Fig. 19 at 8000 seconds. As expected for volumet￾ric heating, the absorber temperature increases from inlet to out￾let, and the primary air temperature follows the same trend. In the
legend, T_C, T_M, and T_P stand for the absorber temperature for
C, M, and P, respectively. The primary air temperatures at the out￾let for C, M, and P are identified with T_ac, T_am and T_ap, respec￾tively. The following may be inferred from this figure:
a. for one intermediate absorber layer, the absorber temperature
increases from 460 K at z/L = 0 to 890 K at z/L = 1. The air
temperature increases from 310 K at z/L = 0 to 870 K at z/L = 1.
b. for two intermediate absorber layers, the absorber temperature
for C and M increases from 580 K at z/L = 0 to 890 K at z/L = 1,
and that of P increases from 565 K to 850 K. The air temper￾ature for C and M increases from 317 K at z/L = 0 to 861 K
13

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 19. Axial variation of primary air and absorber temperature at 8000 seconds for a) one intermediate absorber layer, b) two intermediate absorber layers and c) three
intermediate absorber layers for volumetric heating.
at z/L = 1. The air temperature for P increases from 310 K at
z/L = 1 to 823 K at z/L = 1.
c. for three intermediate absorber layers, the absorber tempera￾ture for C and M increases from 664 K at z/L = 0 to 865 K at
z/L = 1 and that of P increases from 633 K at z/L = 0 to 812 K
at z/L = 1. The air temperature for C and M increases from 321
K at z/L = 1 to 815 K at z/L = 1 and for P from 309 K at z/L = 1
to 768 K at z/L = 1.
d. the difference between the absorber and primary air tempera￾ture increases with the number of layers, represented by a ver￾tical dotted double-arrowed line, for the same total air mass
flow rate m˙ a = 0.966 kg/s. This is attributed to the calculated,
surface-area averaged, convective heat transfer coefficients for
the internal flow in a pore (hd_pr) 48.5 W/m2K, 25.3 W/m2K,
and 15.6 W/m2K for one, two and three intermediate absorber
layers, respectively.
e. the absorber temperature gradient along the axial direction (in￾dicated by inclined dotted line) is the least for three interme￾diate absorber layers. This is expected to reduce the generated
thermal stress and enhance the durability of OVAR for several
intermediate absorber layers. Also, the multiple intermediate
absorber layers may be selected considering fabrication diffi￾culties with a large number of pores. This means a balance be￾tween the losses and durability is the key for design optimiza￾tion. The heat losses for the OVAR designs with 1, 2, and three
intermediate absorber layers are performed subsequently.
The maximum radiation-based heat loss from the exposed front
surface of the absorbers is estimated using the following equation:
q˙rad = abσ Af ront

T 4
ab − T 4
atm (18)
where ab is the emissivity of absorber material, Af ront is the ex￾posed aperture of OVAR, σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, and
Tab is the absorber surface temperature at z=0. The ab may be
expressed as a function of temperature and porosity, if available,
for a particular absorber geometry. In the presented simulations
ab = 0.6 is considered for a conservative assessment of the re￾ceiver efficiency. The natural convection based heat loss from the
exposed absorber surface is obtained using the following equation:
q˙ nat = hnatAf ront(Tabs − Tatm) (19)
14

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 20. Heat losses from OVAR for volumetric heating with a) one intermediate absorber layer, b) two intermediate absorber layers, and c) thee intermediate absorber
layers.
where the heat transfer coefficient (hnat) is obtained using the fol￾lowing Nusselt number correlation [53]:
Nunat =

0.60 +
0.378Ra1/6
d

1 + (0.559/Pr)
9/168/27 2
(20)
The computed heat losses for volumetric heating of the ab￾sorbers with one, two and three intermediate absorber layers are
shown in Fig. 20. Following may be observed:
a. for one intermediate absorber layer, the radiation and natural
convection-based heat losses are comparable.
b. for 2 and three intermediate absorber layers, the radiation￾based heat loss is 1-2 times that of the natural convection at
around 8000 seconds. This means radiation-based heat loss is
likely to dominate in an OVAR with several intermediate ab￾sorber layers.
c. generally, the increasing trend of heat losses is attributed to the
rising absorber temperature during the unsteady phase.
3.2. Non-volumetric heating
The computed, time-dependent, primary air temperatures at
the outlet of C, M and P are shown in Fig. 21. The air temper￾ature difference between C, M, and P for non-volumetric heat￾ing is higher than volumetric heating. In other words, thermal
non-uniformity will be enhanced for non-volumetric heating. Thus,
efforts are ongoing to homogenize the concentrated beam radi￾ation with sophisticated optical devices like homogenizers, onto
the OVAR aperture. The approximation to estimate the extinction
coefficient (β) is adopted from [49]. Here, the parameter c for
β = c(1−ε)
dpr is reported as variable (see e.g. [57,58]). Considering
these findings 2≤ c ≤ 5 is numerically varied to calculate the ther￾mal efficiency (ηth) for the case with one intermediate absorber
layer. The calculated thermal efficiencies are 0.74 ≤ ηth ≤0.76 for
non-volumetric heating conditions. The change in computed ther￾mal efficiency of about 0.02 is quite small and is consistent with
the reported findings of [58]. Therefore, c = 3.0 is maintained for
simulations with this known uncertainty. The heat flux on the solid
absorber surface is 507 – 640 Suns for 1 intermediate layer, 513-
627 Suns for 2 intermediate layers and 528-612 Suns for 3 inter￾mediate layers for the non-volumetric heating condition. Following
may be inferred from Fig. 21a, 21b, and 21c:
a. for one intermediate absorber layer, the air temperature rapidly
increases from 300 K to 685 K for P, 300 K to 750 K for M and
300 K to 790 K for C up to 2000 seconds. At the steady-state,
the temperature difference between C and P exceeds 110 K, and
the maximum air temperature is higher than 800 K.
b. for two intermediate absorber layers (denoted by m1 and m2),
the air temperatures increase from 300 K to 640 K for P, 300 K
to 700/723 K for m1/m2 and 300 K – 730 K for C. At the steady￾15

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 21. Temporal variation of primary air temperature at the absorber outlet for a) one intermediate absorber layer, b) two intermediate absorber layers and c) three
intermediate absorber layers for non-volumetric heating.
state, the maximum temperature difference between C and P is
around 95 K, and the maximum air temperature is around 780
K. This means, with the increasing number of intermediate ab￾sorber layers (i) the maximum air temperature decreases and
(ii) the thermal non-uniformity is also mitigated. These are at￾tributed to the redistribution of heat flux onto the absorbers
arranged in several layers (see Fig. 2).
c. for three intermediate absorber layers, the maximum air tem￾perature at around 8000 seconds is around 730 K, and the max￾imum temperature difference between C and P is around 80 K.
This reconfirms the effect of multiple intermediate absorbers
layers on the heating up of air.
The computed absorber and primary air temperatures at 8000
seconds, along the axial direction, are shown in Fig. 22 for OVAR
design with one, two, and three intermediate absorber layers. As
expected, the non-volumetric heating results in the highest tem￾perature at the inlet z/L = 0 and the lowest temperature at the
outlet z/L = 1. The primary air temperature increases from z/L = 0
to z/L = 1 on account of the heat transfer from the heated ab￾sorbers. The following may be inferred from this figure:
a. the thermal development length for air increases with the
number of intermediate absorber layers. Consequently, the pri￾mary air attains the absorber temperature at around z/L = 0.25
for one intermediate absorber layer and z/L = 0.65 for three
intermediate absorber layers. An important observation is that
the absorber length is to be carefully estimated depending on
the number of intermediate absorber layers.
b. the maximum absorber temperature at the inlet (z/L = 0) re￾duces with the increasing number of intermediate absorber lay￾ers. As a consequence, the primary air attains the lowest tem￾perature for the three intermediate absorber layers.
c. the absorber temperature gradient, along the axial direction, is
the highest for one intermediate absorber layer. Therefore, for
an OVAR design, the thermal stresses will increase with the de￾creasing number of the intermediate absorber layers. As a con￾sequence, the use of multiple intermediate absorber layers will
be beneficial for the durability of an OVAR design.
One important question arises, whether the heat loss will be
lower for a higher number of intermediate absorber layers?
This aspect will be investigated subsequently.
The computed, time-dependent, heat losses via radiation and
natural convection are shown in Fig. 23. The increasing heat loss
with the number of intermediate absorber layers is attributed to
the increasing exposed surface area of absorbers to atmospheric
16

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 22. Axial variation of primary air and absorber temperature at 8000 seconds, for OVAR design with a) one intermediate absorber layer, b) two intermediate absorber
layers and c) three intermediate absorber layers, for non-volumetric heating.
conditions. Also, the heat loss for non-volumetric heating is sub￾stantially greater than that of volumetric heating on account of the
exposed surface temperature. An important observation is that the
radiation-based heat loss is 3-4 times that of the natural convec￾tion. This means an appropriate coating with a low emissivity for
thermal radiation and a high absorptivity for solar radiation should
be employed, especially at the exposed surface of absorbers, for
non-volumetric heating. Therefore, further improvement of the de￾veloped multi-zone model, including thermo-optical coupling, is
foreseen.
3.3. Parametric investigation for an OVAR design
So far, detailed investigations are performed to assess the effect
of volumetric and non-volumetric heating on the absorber temper￾ature, primary air temperature, and heat losses. In this sub-section,
investigations are performed to assess the effect of important pa￾rameters, such as air return ratio (ARR), power to air mass flow
rate ratio (q˙ /m˙ a), absorber diameter to length ratio, absorber gap
to length ratio, porosity, and return air temperature on the thermal
efficiency of an OVAR, for volumetric and non-volumetric heating
conditions. This is a step towards the scale-up of an OVAR, design
optimization, and recommending the operating conditions for high
thermal efficiency and durability.
3.3.1. Effect of Air Return Ratio
Air return ratio (ARR) is defined as the fraction of return air,
mixed with atmospheric air, which is sucked into the absorber
pores as the primary air. Fig. 24 shows that the thermal efficiency
of an OVAR increases with the increasing ARR for volumetric and
non-volumetric heating, inlet return air temperature Tr_in = 300 K,
dab/L =1 and G/L = 0.4. Therefore, ideally, a very high ARR should
be preferred, which will promote internal cooling and thermal uni￾formity for absorbers. However, a high ARR will reduce the tem￾perature of primary air, a mixture of ambient air and return air, at
the absorber inlet. Consequently, a marginal reduction in the out￾let primary air temperature is observed, for ARR > 0.6, in OVAR
with three intermediate absorber layers. Thus an important finding
17

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 23. The heat losses from OVAR for non-volumetric heating with a) one intermediate absorber layer, b) two intermediate absorber layers and c) three intermediate
absorber layers.
Fig. 24. The effect of air return ratio (ARR) on the OVAR thermal efficiency and the outlet temperature of primary air with one, two and three intermediate absorber layers,
for (a) volumetric heating and (b) non-volumetric heating with q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ/kg.
18

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 25. The effect of q˙ /m˙ a on the OVAR thermal efficiency (ηth ) and the outlet temperature of primary air (Tout) with one, two and three intermediate absorber layers, for
(a) volumetric heating and (b) non-volumetric heating.
is that the ARR should be carefully adopted for an OVAR design,
pumping power, and outlet temperature requirement. As a com￾promise, an ARR = 0.6 is recommended for the prescribed OVAR
design with three intermediate absorber layers.
3.3.2. Effect of q˙ /m˙ a
The computed thermal efficiency (ηth) and primary air outlet
temperature (Tout), for 200 ≤ q˙
m˙ a ≤ 800 ( kJ
kg ), different heating con￾ditions, Tr_in = 300 K, dab/L =1 and G/L = 0.4 and ARR = 0.6 are
shown in Fig. 25. Generally, the thermal efficiency decreases with
increasing q˙
m˙ a for volumetric and non-volumetric heating condi￾tions. Following may be inferred:
a. for volumetric heating, 0.9≤ ηth ≤ 0.96 for one intermediate ab￾sorber layer and 0.79≤ ηth ≤ 0.88 for three intermediate ab￾sorber layers. For non-volumetric heating, 0.71≤ ηth ≤0.81 for
one intermediate absorber layer and 0.58≤ ηth ≤ 0.69 for three
intermediate absorber layers. The thermal efficiency for an
OVAR design decreases with the increasing number of interme￾diate absorber layers for volumetric and non-volumetric heat￾ing.
b. the outlet temperature of primary air is higher for volumetric
heating, in comparison to that of the non-volumetric heating,
in an OVAR. Therefore, an OVAR with non-volumetric heating
should be operated at a much higher q˙
m˙ a in comparison to the
volumetric heating to attain the desired primary air tempera￾ture.
3.3.3. Effect of absorber diameter to length ratio
Fig. 26 shows the variation of OVAR thermal efficiency
(ηth) and the outlet temperature of primary air (Tout) for differ￾ent absorber diameter to length ratios (0.5 ≤ dab/L ≤ 3), different
heating conditions, Tr_in = 300 K, G/L = 0.4, and ARR = 0.6. The
following may be inferred from this figure:
a. ηth increases for 0.5 ≤ dab/L ≤ 1 with volumetric heating and
0.5 ≤ dab/L ≤ 2 with non-volumetric heating for two and three
intermediate absorber layers. Therefore, a relatively smaller ab￾sorber diameter should be preferred for volumetric heating
in comparison to non-volumetric heating conditions. A sharp
rise in ηth for 0.5 ≤ dab/L ≤ 1 is an indication that the ab￾sorber length is inadequate to attain the highest air temper￾ature, which leads to insufficient heat recovery. Also, the de￾cay in ηthfor 2 ≤ dab/L ≤ 3 indicates that the absorber length is
more than adequate, and the absorber surface area is substan￾tial for heat loss.
b. apparently, for both the heating conditions, 1 ≤ dab/L ≤ 2 may
be recommended for the scale-up OVAR design with three in￾termediate absorber layers. Similar investigations are recom￾mended for selecting an appropriate absorber length for other
OVAR designs.
3.3.4. Effect of absorber gap to length ratio
Fig. 27 depicts the variation of ηth and Tout for different
absorber- gap to length ratios (0.05 ≤ G/L ≤ 0.3), Tr_in = 300 K,
dab/L = 1, and ARR = 0.6. It may be noted that G/L determines
the OVAR aperture and the return airflow regime around the ab￾sorbers. A small G/L implies densely packed, and a high G/L implies
loosely packed absorbers in an OVAR. The increasing ηth for 0.05 ≤
G/L ≤ 0.2, reveals that the relative heat recovery is higher than that
of the heat losses from an OVAR aperture. It is worthwhile to note
that ηth reaches a practical saturation at G/L = 0.2 for the OVAR
designs with one, two and three intermediate absorber layers, and
for different heating conditions. Therefore, 0.15 ≤ G/L ≤ 0.25 may
be recommended for the scale-up OVAR design with several inter￾mediate absorber layers.
3.3.5. Effect of absorber porosity
Fig. 28 depicts the variation of ηth and Tout for different ab￾sorber porosities (0.3 ≤ ε ≤ 0.8), different heating conditions,
Tr_in = 300 K, dab/L = 1, G/L = 0.4, and ARR = 0.6. The variations
in ηth and Tout with porosity, for volumetric and non-volumetric
heating effects, follow different trends. For volumetric heating, ηth
increases rapidly for 0.3 ≤ ε ≤ 0.6, and attains a practical limit. For
non-volumetric heating ηth increases monotonically with ε, how￾ever, the outlet primary air temperature follows a different trend.
Therefore, ε for an absorber with the straight pore and volumet￾ric heating should be around 0.6, and ε for an absorber with non￾volumetric heating should be as high as possible. However, with
increasing ε, the material strength and therefore the durability of
an absorber will be affected. Thus, prescribing an upper limit for ε
will be dependent on the selected absorber material.
19

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 26. The effect of dab/L on the OVAR thermal efficiency (ηth ) and the outlet temperature of primary air (Tout) with one, two and three intermediate absorber layers, for
(a) volumetric heating and (b) non-volumetric heating with q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ/kg.
Fig. 27. The effect of G/L on the OVAR thermal efficiency (ηth ) and the outlet temperature of primary air (Tout) with one, two and three intermediate absorber layers, for (a)
volumetric heating and (b) non-volumetric heating with q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ/kg.
3.3.6. Effect of return air inlet temperature
Fig. 29 depicts the variation of ηth and Tout for different return
air inlet temperatures (300 K – 400 K), different heating condi￾tions, dab/L = 1, G/L = 0.4, and ARR = 0.6. Following may be in￾ferred:
a. ηth decreases with the return air inlet temperature for volumet￾ric and non-volumetric heating.
b. Tout increases with the increasing return air inlet temperature
for volumetric and non-volumetric heating.
The above reveals that with the increasing return air inlet tem￾perature, the primary air temperature at the OVAR inlet increases.
However, the temperature difference between the absorber and
primary air decreases. Consequently, the heat transfer rate de￾creases, leading to a reduction in heat recovery or thermal effi￾ciency. On the other hand, the increasing values for Tout is an out￾come of the overall temperature rise (T) from inlet to outlet.
Thus, it can be concluded that T will be lower for a higher re￾turn air inlet temperature. This leads to drawing a recommenda￾tion that the inlet temperature of return air should be as low as
possible for internal cooling for absorbers, thermal re-distribution
for the absorbers, and also for achieving high thermal efficiency.
3.3.7. Effect of absorber emissivity
Fig. 30 depicts the variation of ηth and Tout for different
temperature-dependent absorber emissivity [59], different heating
conditions, Tr_in = 300 K, dab/L = 1, G/L = 0.4, and ARR = 0.6, for
one intermediate absorber layer. The maximum relative percent￾age difference in the computed thermal efficiency (ηth) for a wide
range (0.3 ≤  ≤0.7) is around 2-4 %. Also, with increasing value
for  the thermal efficiency decreases, as expected, for an OVAR.
Similar trend is expected for two and three intermediate absorber
20

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 28. The effect of absorber porosity on the OVAR thermal efficiency (ηth ) and the outlet temperature of primary air (Tout) with one, two and three intermediate absorber
layers, for (a) volumetric heating and (b) non-volumetric heating with q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ
kg .
Fig. 29. The effect of return air inlet temperature on the OVAR thermal efficiency (ηth ) and the outlet temperature of primary air (Tout) with one, two and three intermediate
absorber layers, for (a) volumetric heating and (b) non-volumetric heating with q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ
kg .
layers. Therefore, the reported values using  = 0.6 are conserva￾tive. The unavailability of a suitable correlation between emissivity
and porosity for straight pore-based absorbers limits further inves￾tigation and remains a prospect for further improvement.
3.3.8. Effect of time-dependent solar irradiance
The effect of time-dependent solar irradiance on the heat trans￾fer in an OVAR is analyzed using the average direct normal irra￾diance at Jodhpur for July 2012 and December 2012 (see Fig. 31a
and 31b) [60]. The computed average air temperatures at the OVAR
outlet for the design with one, two and three intermediate layers
considering Tr_in = 300 K, dab/L = 1, G/L = 0.4, and ARR = 0.6 are
shown in Fig. 30c and 30d. These reveal the temporal variation and
allow operating an application within a certain time interval of a
day, depending on the solar irradiance. For example, in the present
case, the air temperature exceeds 600 K for July after around 9:00
am, whereas the air temperature exceeds 800 K for December after
around 9:00 am.
3.4. Comparative Assessment for the scale-up OVAR designs
So far, straight absorber pore-based scale-up OVAR designs with
one, two, and three intermediate absorber layers have been ana￾lyzed, and some recommendations are provided for its operation.
One final question remains: are the scale-up OVAR designs com￾parable to the state-of-the-art, in terms of thermal efficiency? To
answer this question, further analyses are performed for volumet￾ric and non-volumetric heating with 200 ≤ q˙
m˙ a ≤ 800 kJ
kg , ARR = 0.6,
and the absorber design parameters as in Table 2. For this assess￾ment, the available data from Hoffschmidt et al. [5], Avila-Marin
et al. [12], Capuano et al. [61], Singh et al. [44], and Fend et al.
[62] are compared with the scale-up OVAR designs in Fig. 32. The
following may be inferred:
21

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 30. The effect of emissivity on the OVAR thermal efficiency (ηth ) and the outlet temperature of primary air (Tout) with one intermediate absorber layers, for (a) volu￾metric heating and (b) non-volumetric heating with q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ
kg .
Fig. 31. Time-dependent, monthly averaged, solar irradiance for a) July 2012, b) December 2012 at Jodhpur; the computed time-dependent primary air temperature at the
OVAR outlet for c) July 2012 and d) December 2012.
22

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Fig. 32. A comparative assessment of thermal efficiency for the proposed scale-up OVAR design with one, two and three intermediate absorber layers with the reported
data.
a. with volumetric heating 0.79 ≤ ηth ≤ 0.96 and withnon￾volumetric heating 0.58 ≤ ηth ≤ 0.81 for the OVAR designs
with one, two, and three intermediate absorber layers. This is
well in the range of reported data.
b. Capuano et al. [61] reported a reasonably high value for ηth
indicating that the variable porosity-based design offers the
volumetric-type absorption. However, such a complex structure
will be prone to dust deposition, which is detrimental to its op￾eration at a high temperature [46].
c. considering the above, adopting a low exposed surface area for
the OVAR designs as in [61] is recommended for the scale-up of
straight pore absorber-based OVAR designs, which is also bene￾ficial to mitigate the dust deposition-related critical challenges.
d. for volumetric and non-volumetric heating conditions, the rec￾ommended ratio of absorber diameter (dab) to length (L) is
1 ≤ dab/L ≤ 2 for the scale-up OVAR design with three interme￾diate absorber layers.
e. for volumetric and non-volumetric heating conditions, the rec￾ommended ratio of absorber gap (G) to length (L) is 0.15 ≤
G/L ≤ 0.25 for the scale-up OVAR designs with three interme￾diate absorber layers.
f. based on the performed numerical investigations, the use of
multiple intermediate absorber layers is recommended for the
scale-up OVAR design. This is expected to mitigate the radial
and axial thermal non-uniformity for absorbers and enhance
the durability of an OVAR design.
4. Conclusions and recommendations
This paper presents a comprehensive, multi-zone, mathemati￾cal model for unsteady heat transfer in a straight pore-based open
volumetric air receiver (OVAR). In this model, the porous absorbers
are identified as central (C), intermediate (M) and peripheral (P)
depending on their locations. In this model, all the modes of heat
exchange between absorbers, between absorbers and receiver cas￾ing, and between absorbers and return air are included. A com￾parative assessment between the computed and measured primary
air temperature at the absorber outlets revealed that a) the tran￾sient and steady phases are reproduced and b) the model predicts
the experimental values within an uncertainty of about ±7% at the
steady-state. As a next step, the model is used to investigate scale￾up OVAR designs with one, two and three intermediate absorber
layers, for air mass flow rate m˙ a = 0.966 kg/s and input power
q˙ = 0.58 MW or q˙
m˙ a = 600 kJ/kg. The analyses lead to the following
conclusions and recommendations:
a. the temperature difference between absorbers and primary air
decreases with the increasing number of intermediate absorber
layers for volumetric and non-volumetric heating. The maxi￾mum temperature difference between the absorber and pri￾mary air at the inlet is less than 400 K for volumetric heating
and is greater than 800 K for non-volumetric heating. For vol￾umetric heating, the radiation loss is 1-2 times that of natural
convection, and for non-volumetric heating, the radiation loss
is 3-4 times that of natural convection. Therefore, the use of a
much higher flux concentration is recommended for the non￾volumetric heating to attain the desired temperature in com￾parison to the volumetric heating.
b. the recommended air return ratio (ARR) is 0.6, for the scale￾up OVAR design, with volumetric and non-volumetric heating
conditions. A higher ARR may lead to a reduction of primary
air temperature at the absorber outlet.
c. with volumetric heating the thermal efficiency, 0.79 ≤ ηth ≤
0.96 and with non-volumetric heating the thermal efficiency,
0.58 ≤ ηth ≤ 0.81 for the OVAR designs with one, two, and
three intermediate absorber layers. These compare well with
the existing OVAR designs and the reduction of exposed sur￾face area, following Capuano et al. [61], is recommended for the
scale-up OVAR design.
d. for volumetric heating, the absorber porosity up to 0.6 is rec￾ommended. For non-volumetric heating, a higher value of ab￾sorber porosity may be preferred considering absorber material
for durability.
e. the recommended ratio of (i) absorber gap (G) to length (L) is
0.15 ≤ G/L ≤ 0.25 and (ii) absorber diameter (dab) to length (L)
is 1 ≤ dab/L ≤ 2 for the scale-up OVAR design.
f. with the increasing inlet temperature of return air the rise in
primary air temperature (T) from absorber inlet to outlet de￾creases. Thus, the thermal efficiency of OVAR decreases with
the increasing inlet temperature for return air and is consistent
with the reported findings.
Authors’ Statement
The corresponding author hereby confirms that the submitted
manuscript is original and not submitted elsewhere for publication.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that there is no competing interest.
23

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
Acknowledgement
The authors hereby acknowledge the received infrastructure
support from IIT Jodhpur and IIT (BHU) Varanasi. The received
helpful, critical, and insightful suggestions from the esteemed edi￾tors and reviewers are gratefully acknowledged. These have gone a
long way to improve the quality of this manuscript.
References
[1] M.S. Raboac ˘ a˘, G. Badea, A. Enache, C. Filote, G. Rasoi ˘ , M. Rata, A. Lavric,
R.A. Felseghi, Concentrating solar power technologies, Energies 12 (6) (2019)
1048.
[2] C.K. Ho, B.D. Iverson, Review of high-temperature central receiver designs
for concentrating solar power, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 29
(2014) 835–846.
[3] M. Romero, R. Buck, J.E. Pacheco, An update on solar central receiver systems,
projects, and technologies, J. Sol. Energy Eng. 124 (2) (2002) 98–108.
[4] A.L. Avila-Marin, Volumetric receivers in solar thermal power plants with cen￾tral receiver system technology: a review, Solar energy 85 (5) (2011) 891–910.
[5] B. Hoffschmidt, F.L.M. Tellez, A. Valverde, J.S. Fernandez, V. Fernandez, Perfor￾mance evaluation of the 200-kWth HiTRec-II open volumetric air receiver, J.
Sol. Energy Eng. 125 (1) (2003) 87–94.
[6] M.I. Roldán, O. Smirnova, T. Fend, J.L. Casas, E. Zarza, Thermal analysis and
design of a volumetric solar absorber depending on the porosity, Renewable
Energy 62 (2014) 116–128.
[7] P. Sharma, R. Sarma, L. Chandra, R. Shekhar, P.S. Ghoshdastidar, On the design
and evaluation of open volumetric air receiver for process heat applications,
Solar Energy 121 (2015) 41–55.
[8] P. Sharma, R. Sarma, L. Chandra, R. Shekhar, P.S. Ghoshdastidar, Solar tower
based aluminum heat treatment system: Part I. Design and evaluation of an
open volumetric air receiver, Solar Energy 111 (2015) 135–150.
[9] G. Singh, R. Kumar, A. Dixit, L. Chandra, Thermal and Materials Perspective on
the Design of Open Volumetric Air Receiver for Process Heat Applications, in:
Applications of Solar Energy, Springer, Singapore, 2018, pp. 113–127.
[10] V.D. Kumar, V.K. Upadhyay, G. Singh, S. Mukhopadhyay, L. Chandra, Open vol￾umetric air receiver: An innovative application and a major challenge, Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment (2021) e404.
[11] M. Böhmer, C. Chaza, The ceramic foil volumetric receiver, Solar energy mate￾rials 24 (1-4) (1991) 182–191.
[12] A.L. Avila-Marin, M. Alvarez-Lara, J. Fernandez-Reche, Experimental results of
gradual porosity wire mesh absorber for volumetric receivers, Energy Procedia
49 (2014) 275–283.
[13] C. Pabst, G. Feckler, S. Schmitz, O. Smirnova, R. Capuano, P. Hirth, T. Fend, Ex￾perimental performance of an advanced metal volumetric air receiver for Solar
Towers, Renewable Energy 106 (2017) 91–98.
[14] A.L. Avila-Marin, M.A. de Lara, J. Fernandez-Reche, Experimental results of
gradual porosity volumetric air receivers with wire meshes, Renewable Energy
122 (2018) 339–353.
[15] S. Du, T. Xia, Y.L. He, Z.Y. Li, D. Li, X.Q. Xie, Experiment and optimization study
on the radial graded porous volumetric solar receiver matching non-uniform
solar flux distribution, Applied Energy 275 (2020) 115343.
[16] S. Du, Z. Li, Y. He, D. Li, X. Xie, Y. Gao, Experimental and numerical analy￾sis of the hydraulic and thermal performances of the gradually-varied porous
volumetric solar receiver, Science China Technological Sciences 63 (2020)
1224–1234.
[17] G. Barreto, P. Canhoto, M. Collares-Pereira, Combined experimental and numer￾ical determination of the asymmetry factor of scattering phase functions in
porous volumetric solar receivers, Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 206
(2020) 110327.
[18] V.R. Patil, F. Kiener, A. Grylka, A. Steinfeld, Experimental testing of a solar air
cavity-receiver with reticulated porous ceramic absorbers for thermal process￾ing at above 1000 C, Solar Energy 214 (2021) 72–85.
[19] Q. Li, Q. Zhang, Experimental study on the influence of input solar flux, air
flow rate, and absorber parameters on honeycomb ceramic air receiver perfor￾mance, Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy 12 (2) (2020) 023701.
[20] C. Heisel, C. Caliot, T. Chartier, S. Chupin, P. David, D. Rochais, Digital design
and 3D printing of innovative SiC architectures for high temperature volumet￾ric solar receivers, Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 232 (2021) 111336.
[21] F. Wang, Y. Shuai, H. Tan, C. Yu, Thermal performance analysis of porous media
receiver with concentrated solar irradiation, International Journal of Heat and
Mass Transfer 62 (2013) 247–254.
[22] M.J. Marcos, M. Romero, S. Palero, Analysis of air return alternatives for CRS–
type open volumetric receiver, Energy 29 (5-6) (2004) 677–686.
[23] Z. Wu, C. Caliot, G. Flamant, Z. Wang, Coupled radiation and flow modeling
in ceramic foam volumetric solar air receivers, Solar Energy 85 (9) (2011)
2374–2385.
[24] O. Smirnova, T. Fend, S. Petrer, B. Georg, S. Daniel, J. Christoph, Numerical in￾vestigations of advanced volumetric receiver materials, SolarPACES 2011 Pro￾ceedings (2011).
[25] T. Achenbach, K. Geimer, J. Göttsche, B. Hoffschmidt, A. Lynen, J. Bauer, Sim￾ulation and flow measurements of volumetric high temperature absorbers for
solar tower power plants (2011).
[26] F. Gomez-Garcia, J. Gonzalez-Aguilar, S. Tamayo-Pacheco, G. Olalde, M. Romero,
Numerical analysis of radiation propagation in a multi-layer volumetric solar
absorber composed of a stack of square grids, Solar Energy 121 (2015) 94–
102.
[27] H. Stadler, D. Maldonado, M. Offergeld, P. Schwarzbözl, J. Trautner, CFD model
for the performance estimation of open volumetric receivers and comparison
with experimental data, Solar Energy 177 (2019) 634–641.
[28] G. Barreto, P. Canhoto, M. Collares-Pereira, Three-dimensional CFD modelling
and thermal performance analysis of porous volumetric receivers coupled to
solar concentration systems, Applied Energy 252 (2019) 113433.
[29] Q. Zhu, Y. Xuan, Improving the performance of volumetric solar receivers with
a spectrally selective gradual structure and swirling characteristics, Energy 172
(2019) 467–476.
[30] M. Ali, M. Rady, M.A. Attia, E.M. Ewais, Consistent coupled optical and thermal
analysis of volumetric solar receivers with honeycomb absorbers, Renewable
Energy 145 (2020) 1849–1861.
[31] P. Wang, J.B. Li, R.N. Xu, P.X. Jiang, Non-uniform and volumetric effect on the
hydrodynamic and thermal characteristics in a unit solar absorber, Energy 225
(2021) 120130.
[32] P. Sharma, L. Chandra, P.S. Ghoshdastidar, R. Shekhar, A novel approach for
modelling fluid flow and heat transfer in an Open Volumetric Air Receiver us￾ing ANSYS-FLUENT, Solar Energy 204 (2020) 246–255.
[33] M.I. Roldán, A. Avila-Marin, M. Alvarez-Lara, J. Fernandez-Reche, Experimental
and numerical characterization of ceramic and metallic absorbers under lab-s￾cale conditions, Energy Procedia 69 (2015) 523–531.
[34] X.L. Li, C. Sun, X.L. Xia, Z.H. Li, Y. Li, Modeling of coupled heat transfer in a
windowed volumetric solar receiver, Solar Energy 201 (2020) 195–208.
[35] R. Pitz-Paal, B. Hoffschmidt, M. Böhmer, M. Becker, Experimental and numer￾ical evaluation of the performance and flow stability of different types of
open volumetric absorbers under non-homogeneous irradiation, Solar Energy
60 (3-4) (1997) 135–150.
[36] S. Luque, G. Menéndez, M. Roccabruna, J. González-Aguilar, L. Crema,
M. Romero, Exploiting volumetric effects in novel additively manufactured
open solar receivers, Solar Energy 174 (2018) 342–351.
[37] G. Singh, S. Luque, J. González-Aguilar, M. Romero, L. Chandra, Open volumet￾ric air receiver: Current status, challenges and innovative solutions, Reference
module in materials science and materials engineering, Elsevier, 2018.
[38] F. Bai, One dimensional thermal analysis of silicon carbide ceramic foam used
for solar air receiver, International Journal of Thermal Sciences 49 (12) (2010)
2400–2404.
[39] H.J. Lee, J.K. Kim, S.N. Lee, Y.H. Kang, Numerical analysis of heat transfer in
multichannel volumetric solar receivers, Transactions of the Korean Society of
Mechanical Engineers B 35 (12) (2011) 1383–1389.
[40] F. Zaversky, L. Aldaz, M. Sánchez, A.L. Ávila-Marín, M.I. Roldán, J. Fernán￾dez-Reche, A. Füssel, W. Beckert, J. Adler, Numerical and experimental evalua￾tion and optimization of ceramic foam as solar absorber–Single-layer vs mul￾ti-layer configurations, Applied energy 210 (2018) 351–375.
[41] R.R. Ribeiro, M.J. de Lemos, Transient behavior and thermal efficiency of vol￾umetric heat receivers, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 149
(2020) 119128.
[42] M. Abuseada, N. Ozalp, C. Ophoff, Numerical and experimental investigation of
heat transfer in a solar receiver with a variable aperture, International Journal
of Heat and Mass Transfer 128 (2019) 125–135.
[43] R. Capuano, T. Fend, P. Schwarzbözl, O. Smirnova, H. Stadler, B. Hoffschmidt,
R. Pitz-Paal, Numerical models of advanced ceramic absorbers for volumetric
solar receivers, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 58 (2016) 656–665.
[44] G. Singh, V.D. Kumar, L. Chandra, R. Shekhar, P.S. Ghoshdastidar, One-dimen￾sional zonal model for the unsteady heat transfer analysis in an open volu￾metric air receiver, ASME J. Therm. Sci. Eng. Appl. 13 (1) (2021) 1–14.
[45] G. Singh, L. Chandra, Detrimental Effects of Dust Deposition in Pores of an
Open Volumetric Air Receiver (2017).
[46] V.K. Upadhyay, G. Singh, L. Chandra, B. Bandyopadhyay, On the dust deposition
and its effects on heat transfer in absorber pores of an open volumetric air
receiver, Solar Energy 211 (2020) 1206–1213.
[47] A. Salomé, F. Chhel, G. Flamant, A. Ferrière, F. Thiery, Control of the flux dis￾tribution on a solar tower receiver using an optimized aiming point strategy:
Application to THEMIS solar tower, Solar Energy 94 (2013) 352–366.
[48] Y.L. He, K. Wang, Y. Qiu, B.C. Du, Q. Liang, S. Du, Review of the solar flux dis￾tribution in concentrated solar power: non-uniform features, challenges, and
solutions, Applied Thermal Engineering 149 (2019) 448–474.
[49] T.J. Hendricks, J.R. Howell, Absorption/scattering coefficients and scattering
phase functions in reticulated porous ceramics, Journal of Heat Transfer 118
(1) (1996) 79–87.
[50] F. Téllez, M. Romero, P. Heller, A. Valverde, G. Dibowski, S. Ulmer, Thermal
performance of SolAir 3000 kWth ceramic volumetric solar receiver, 12th So￾larPACES International Symposium on Concentrated Solar Power and Chemical
Energy (2004).
[51] H. Stadler, A. Tiddens, P. Schwarzbözl, F. Göhring, T. Baumann, J. Trautner, Im￾proved performance of open volumetric receivers by employing an external air
return system, Solar Energy 155 (2017) 1157–1164.
[52] A. Tiddens, M. Röger, H. Stadler, B. Hoffschmidt, Air return ratio measurements
at the solar tower Jülich using a tracer gas method, Solar Energy 146 (2017)
351–358.
[53] F.P. Incropera, D.P. DeWitt, Introduction to heat transfer, seventh ed., John Wi￾ley Publishers, New York, NY, 2007.
24

V.D. Kumar, G. Singh, L. Chandra et al. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 191 (2022) 122747
[54] R. Sarma, Design and Analysis of Recirculating Air System in an Open Volu￾metric Air Receiver, M. Tech. Thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur,
2013.
[55] V.D. Kumar, V.K. Upadhyay, G. Singh, S. Mukhopadhyay, L. Chandra, Open vol￾umetric air receiver: An innovative application and a major challenge, Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment (2021) e404.
[56] FM White, Fluid mechanics, 7th edn, McGraw Hill education, New Delhi, 2015.
[57] P.F. Hsu, J.R. Howell, Measurements of thermal conductivity and optical prop￾erties of porous partially stabilized zirconia, EXPERIMENTAL HEAT TRANSFER
An International Journal 5 (4) (1992) 293–313.
[58] A. Kribus, Y. Gray, M. Grijnevich, G. Mittelman, S. Mey-Cloutier, C. Caliot, The
promise and challenge of solar volumetric absorbers, Solar Energy 110 (2014)
463–481.
[59] N. Nunak, K. Roonprasang, T. Suesut, T. Nunak, Emissivity estimation using
thermographic camera, Advanced Materials Research 811 (2013) 380–387.
[60] S. Shekhar, Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI): Inter-comparability of Weather
Databases in Context of India, Heat treatment 40 (2012) 80.
[61] R. Capuano, T. Fend, H. Stadler, B. Hoffschmidt, R. Pitz-Paal, Optimized volu￾metric solar receiver: Thermal performance prediction and experimental vali￾dation, Renewable Energy 114 (2017) 556–566.
[62] T. Fend, P. Schwarzbözl, O. Smirnova, D. Schöllgen, C. Jakob, Numerical inves￾tigation of flow and heat transfer in a volumetric solar receiver, Renewable
energy 60 (2013) 655–661.
25