A reduced order pseudochannel 
model accounting for flow 
maldistribution in automotive 
catalysis
Pratheeba Chanda Nagarajan1,2,4, Henrik Ström2,4 & Jonas Sjöblom3,4
Exhaust aftertreatment systems (EATS) play a critical role in reducing emissions and ensuring 
compliance with stringent emission regulations. Catalytic converters, as part of EATS, involve complex 
physico-chemical processes. To accurately predict their behavior in realistic geometries, transient 
3D models are necessary. However, the computational cost associated with simulations based on 
such models prevents their application to long-time behaviors as well as in real-time control and 
diagnostics. While single-channel models (SCMs) are computationally efficient, they struggle to 
provide accurate predictions during real-time operations with flow maldistribution. In this study, we 
propose a pseudochannel model derived using steady-state reactive 3D simulations and a nonlinear 
least squares optimization technique. We show that the performance of this pseudochannel model is 
superior to a conventional SCM in both transient and steady state test cases. At the same time, the 
computational cost of the pseudochannel model is equivalent to that of the SCM. These results imply 
that flow maldistribution effects can be well incorporated in SCMs via a pseudochannel approach that 
relies on relatively inexpensive steady-state system data.
Keywords Catalytic converter, 3D-CFD, 1D-SCM, Pseudochannel, Reduced order model
Nearly two-thirds of the total energy supplied globally is provided by the combustion of natural gas, hydrocarbon 
oils and biofuels. These energy carriers are responsible for emissions that account for slightly over half of the 
total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions1
. Internal combustion engines account for 98% of transport, and road 
transport accounts for 23.1% of the total GHG emissions in 20222
. Gases such as carbon monoxide (CO), carbon 
dioxide (CO2), hydrocarbons (HC), and nitrogen oxides (NOx) are emitted in the exhausts from road transport 
vehicles such as cars, trucks, buses, etc.3
. Specifically in the European Union (EU) region, of the 903.3 million 
metric tonnes of CO2 emitted in 20224
, 15% and 6% were the contributions by light commercial vehicles (LCV) 
and heavy duty vehicles (HDV) respectively. NOx emissions have come down to 2.6 million metric tonnes 
in 2022 and these are significantly reduced from the levels in 1990s (8.1 million metric tonnes)5
. Automotive 
exhausts are known to be harmful to human life and the environment. Due to the ubiquitous presence of vehicles 
in enabling the transportation of people and goods, replacing them and the fuels that power them presents a 
significant challenge3
. Alternate fuels that are either carbon neutral or sourced from biomass may reduce the 
impact of emissions on the environment. Since combustion is exothermic, a large amount of heat is also released 
during the process. This heat is a primary contributor to the formation of nitrogen oxides (NOx) even in carbon￾zero fuels such as hydrogen (H2)6
.
Emission legislations are regulatory frameworks established by governments to control and reduce the release 
of harmful pollutants into the atmosphere7
. Over time, emission legislations have become increasingly stringent, 
reflecting the necessity to counteract the harmful effects on the environment and human life. These emission 
legislations typically specify emission standards, which are legally enforceable limits on the concentration 
or mass of pollutants that can be emitted from a specific source. These standards may vary depending on 
the type of pollutant, the source of emissions, and the geographic region. Common pollutants regulated by 
1Division of Energy Conversion and Propulsion Systems, Department of Mechanics and Maritime Sciences, Chalmers 
University of Technology, Gothenburg 41296, Sweden. 2Division of Fluid Dynamics, Department of Mechanics 
and Maritime Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg 41296, Sweden. 3Division of Transport, 
Energy and Environment, Department of Mechanics and Maritime Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, 
Gothenburg 41296, Sweden. 4Pratheeba Chanda Nagarajan, Henrik Ström and Jonas Sjöblom contributed equally 
to this work. email: henrik.strom@chalmers.se; jonas.sjoblom@chalmers.se
OPEN
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 1
www.nature.com/scientificreports

emission legislations include nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), unburnt 
hydrocarbons (UHC), particulate matter (PM). Catalytic converters are used in vehicles to be compliant with 
emission legislations.
The catalytic converters used in combustion systems such as power plants, stationary engines, automobiles 
and marine vessels convert some of the aforementioned emissions to CO2 and N2. These converters are often 
monolithic reactors having walls coated with a porous washcoat layer that contains the active catalytic materials, 
such as the platinum group metals (PGM). Catalytic reactions convert CO, HC and NOx to CO2, N2 and H2O 8
. The catalytic conversion of pollutants occurs through oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions catalyzed by the 
active sites on the catalyst surface. These reactions take place at elevated temperatures, typically ranging from 
150◦C to 300◦C. The efficiency of catalytic converters is strongly dependent on their operating temperature. 
Below a certain temperature threshold known as the light-off temperature, catalytic activity is limited, and 
emissions reduction is inefficient9
. During engine startup or when the catalytic converter is cold, exhaust 
temperatures are low, and the catalyst may not be active. This results in increased emissions of pollutants until 
the catalytic converter reaches its light-off temperature. Consequently, it is of utmost importance to understand 
how a given catalytic converter operates within a certain combustion system, to make sure that it reaches its 
effective temperature range as quickly as possible.
Flow patterns in these catalytic converters are complex due to the space constraints characteristic of 
automobile applications. More specifically, flow maldistribution is typically unavoidable, for example, when 
there is a sharp bend in the inlet pipe of the catalytic converter or if the inlet cone angles are very large to save 
space10. The presence of flow maldistribution implies that certain areas at the catalytic converter inlet receive 
higher velocities, while other areas see lower velocities. Consequently, different regions of the catalyst yield 
varying rates of species conversion, temperature and ageing. The reactor may not be utilized properly, or it may 
have to be over-dimensioned to perform its intended function at all operating conditions. Flow maldistribution 
is therefore, a key phenomenon to understand to accurately predict the long-term behavior of exhaust gas 
aftertreatment systems.
Physical processes like adsorption, desorption, surface reactions and gas phase reactions, convective and 
diffusive transport of mass, momentum and heat occur in the catalytic converters8
, and these transport processes 
and kinetics span large timescales and are coupled and non-linear. These phenomena can be represented by 
partial differential equations in multiple spatial coordinates and time. Mathematical modeling and numerical 
simulations are often used to predict emissions concentrations at the catalyst outlet, by solving conservation 
equations of mass, momentum, energy, and species11–15. With the growing focus on enhancing fuel economy for 
reducing carbon footprint, while reducing tailpipe emissions of regulated pollutants simultaneously, the ability 
to perform real-time (or faster) simulations of after-treatment systems is becoming crucial for implementing 
advanced fueling strategies and optimization algorithms. To this end, simplified models and reduced order 
models are desired for their speed that make them amenable for usage in real-time monitoring and control. The 
bottleneck in these models is to include the non-linear coupling between transport phenomena and chemical 
reactions across multiple spatial and temporal scales with speed and accuracy. The first simplification and a 
common assumption in the mathematical modeling of catalytic converters is that all the channels of the catalytic 
converter are exposed to identical inlet conditions and that the monolith is adiabatic. This simplification 
allows the modeling and analysis of one “single channel” of the many hundreds of channels actually present. 
Such a model is termed a single channel model (SCM). The computational cost required is much lower than a 
full 3D simulation, as a conventional single channel model is only discretized along the axial direction of the 
channel and thus constitutes a 1D description of only a part of the complete geometry. Also, the concentrations 
and temperatures in the bulk and on the channel surface are assumed to be the same (pseudo-homogeneous 
model)16. An important refinement is the 1+1D modeling, where the discretization is made lengthwise and 
through the radial thickness of the wall17–19. Further, heat and mass transport resistances are used to estimate 
the gradients in the longitudinal and transverse directions20. Other developments include incorporating detailed 
kinetics21 and methodology for parameter estimation of kinetic constants20,22. Reduced order models have been 
developed from 1+1D models by computing washcoat diffusional effects, using Jacobian to relate the rate of 
formation of species and concentrations of the species in the washcoat23, and by averaged convection-diffusion￾reaction (CDR) equations that reduce the transverse degrees of freedom in the monolith24. These reduced order 
models constitute different versions of a 1D-SCM.
Warm-up of the catalyst influences the catalyst light-off and is strongly dependent on the heat transfer 
coefficient25. Processes like coldstart and flow maldistribution pose challenges to this SCM. Under these 
conditions, a 3D computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solution is preferred25,26. But the 3D nature of the 
simulation poses challenges in terms of the computational effort, as the simulation time required is significantly 
longer than the corresponding real time. Several approaches like porous media assumption27–30, symmetry in 
geometry27, use of global kinetics for the catalytic reactions31, and effectiveness factor models32, have been tried 
by researchers to reduce the computational load. Despite these simplifying assumptions, the computational load 
prohibits the use of 3D-CFD models for control and monitoring use. It is then desirable to have a model that is 
as computationally effective as the 1D-SCM, while having the accuracy of the 3D-CFD.
In our earlier paper31, we described a methodology of deriving multi-channel models for a reactive simulation 
combing transient CFD simulations and multi variate data analysis methods like principal component analysis 
(PCA), D-optimal design and weighted least squares (WLS). The calibration set consisted of transient inlet 
profiles in mass flowrate, temperature and species concentration. The test cases were either interpolated subsets 
or time-shifted subsets. The accuracy of the predictions of the multi-channel model were comparable with that 
of the CFD simulations, and remarkably better than the single channel model. However, the method requires 
access to the reactive transient CFD data for identifying the channels using PCA and D-optimal design. It is clear 
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

that it would be very advantageous if a reduced order model could be trained using only steady-state reactive 
CFD data, as this would significantly decrease the time needed to acquire the training data.
In this work, we present a novel methodology in which steady-state reactive 3D simulations are combined 
with nonlinear least-squares optimization in the development of a pseudochannel model. The main idea is that 
flow maldistribution is present even in steady state, thus offering a possibility to avoid computationally costly 
transient CFD simulations in the correction of a conventional SCM. By characterizing the flow maldistribution 
in relatively computationally affordable steady state CFD simulations, it becomes possible to devise a pseudo￾SCM that does not represent any particular physical channel, but which maps the average inlet conditions to 
those producing the correct average conversion at the catalyst outlet. The resulting model can then be used in 
realistic systems with flow maldistribution over a wide range of temperatures.
We first present the basis of the formulation of the nonlinear least squares model and the conservation 
equations for the CFD modeling, along with the description of the geometry and our test cases. We finally present 
the performance comparison of the pseudochannel model against the 3D-CFD and 1D-SCM models for various 
test cases, both at steady state and in transient operation. In this study, ’transient operation’ refers to transitions 
between different steady states. While it is computationally feasible to simulate a full transient response, such 
as a complete WHTC (World Harmonized Transient Cycle), such simulations are highly resource-intensive 
and were beyond the scope of the current study. We present the inferences and limitations of the proposed 
pseudochannel model, followed by the conclusions and identified developments required for further improving 
the performance of pseudochannel models.
Proposed methodology - pseudochannel model
In a chemical reactor, the species conversion is a nonlinear function of the reaction rate and the residence time. 
Reaction rate is generally expressed in terms of Arrhenius form. This is shown as
χi = f(τ, k0 exp (−Ea
RT )
[CA]
a) (1)
where, χi is the conversion of species i and is defined as 1 − CAi /CA0 (which is the ratio of moles of reactant 
A reacted (mol/m3
) to that of moles of A fed initially (mol/m3
)), τ is the residence time (s), k0 is the pre￾exponential factor (m3
,K,mol-1,s-1), Ea is the activation energy (J/mol), R is the universal gas constant (J/mol,K), 
T is temperature (K), and [CA]
a is the functional form of the species concentration.
In this context, an SCM is an elegant and robust 1D-model that is used to predict the species concentration at 
the exit of the catalytic converter33. In the SCM, it is assumed that every channel experiences the same inlet 
conditions at any given time. Under adiabatic conditions, the heat of reaction, if exothermic, heats up the gases 
to increase the temperature. When there is flow maldistribution, some of the channels experience a larger flow, 
while some other channels experience a smaller flow. This causes differences in channel temperatures and 
residence times. Hence, the conversion is a (non-linear) function of the flow maldistribution in addition to 
residence time and temperature as given in Equation 1.
The conversion in a realistic system is the mass weighted average of the spatially distributed concentrations at 
the reactor outlet. When a 3D-CFD model is used to represent a realistic catalytic converter, it describes the axial 
and radial flow field and the heat and mass transfer effects in great detail, and for the purpose of the current work, 
it can thus be considered to provide the true solution to the flow field. Applying an SCM to a realistic system will 
yield erroneous outlet predictions in the presence of flow maldistribution, owing to the assumption of uniform 
inlet conditions and the neglect of radial heat transfer. The predicted conversions will then be different from 
those in the real system or those predicted from 3D models. At constant temperature, a pseudochannel model 
can be envisaged as an SCM that will give the same conversion as the system with flow maldistribution, at a 
different (pseudo-physical) residence time. Thus, for realistic systems with flow maldistribution, Equation 1 is 
recast as
χi = f(τ, k0 exp (−Ea
RT )
[CA]
a, geometry). (2)
The objective function required in the derivation of the pseudochannel model will then be formulated as follows: 
find the residence time of an SCM that will provide the same conversion of the chosen species at steady state 
reactive conditions at a known inlet temperature.
τSCM = min∑nsp
i=1
f(χiCFD − χiSCM )
2 (3)
where nsp is the species that are considered in the objective function, namely, CO, C3H6 and NO.
Here, the true solution (velocity, temperature and species concentration) for the flow field is obtained from 
steady-state reactive 3D-CFD simulations. The unknown variable (the residence time for an equivalent 1D-SCM) 
can be obtained by non-linear optimization, by minimizing the error between simulated data from the detailed 
3D-CFD model and the simplified lumped model (1D-SCM).
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 3
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

As the conversion is a non-linear function of residence time and temperatures, the Levenberg-Marquardt 
algorithm can be used to obtain the solution of Equation 3.
34,35 This algorithm combines the advantages of the 
Gauss-Newton algorithm and the gradient descent algorithm, by interpolating between these two approaches, 
making it particularly effective for minimizing the sum of squared differences between observed and predicted 
values.
In the formulation of the pseudochannel model, the objective function is given by Equation 3 and is solved 
using the lsqnonlin function in MATLAB36. This method needs an appropriate initial guess and bounds are 
not needed to be specified. The mixed cup values at the inlet of the catalyst from the CFD results can be used as 
the initial guess.
This method involves a test matrix that is populated with conversions of species obtained from steady state 
simulations specifying gas hourly space velocities (GHSV), sweeping across a range of temperatures covering 
light-off conditions of species and extending to higher temperatures, where species are fully converted.
Results
Steady state reactive 3D-CFD simulations were performed, with five reactions involving nine species. The test 
matrix consisted of four gas hourly space velocities (GHSV) and ten temperatures spanning from 350 K to 575 
K, chosen to span a relevant range of operating conditions28. These temperatures include light-off temperatures 
for the species CO, C3H6 and NO and temperatures that are attained when the catalyst is sufficiently heated. 
This matrix serves as the “calibration” case to generate the velocity map that has to be specified at the inlet 
for a pseudochannel. Two other sets of transient simulations, in terms of step changes in mass flowrate and 
temperature, form additional test cases to further study the performance of the pseudochannel model.
Steady state simulations
CFD solution variables were collected at the inlet plane P1 and at the outlet plane of the catalyst P3 as shown in 
Figure 1.
The value of mixed cup velocity at the inlet plane P1 is used as the initial guess in the nonlinear least squares 
optimization. The desired conversions of the three species were obtained from the outlet plane P3 of the catalyst. 
lsqnonlin was run for all the 40 operating points and the corresponding velocity of the pseudochannel is 
plotted against the mixed cup inlet velocity as shown in Figure 2. Here, it should be stressed that the mixed cup 
velocity is the one that would have been used in a conventional SCM, whereas the pseudochannel velocity is 
the velocity to use with an SCM to obtain the best possible prediction when assessed against the full-scale CFD 
simulation.
Thus, Figure 2 shows the mapping of velocities of the SCM model with a corresponding 3D-CFD model 
at steady state. At lower GHSV, the behaviour is linear and becomes slightly non-linear, due to effects of flow￾maldistribution. In our earlier paper28, we had noticed that the lower sections of the geometry experience 
Fig. 1. Representation of the geometry. (a) is the 3D representation of the geometry. (b) is the representation 
of planes in the geometry. Three distinct regions can be identified in the geometry: a vertical section and 
unshaded horizontal section and shaded horizontal section. Catalyst is specified as the shaded region. The flow 
starts at the vertical most point in the geometry, then descends down. Before exiting at P4, the flow experiences 
a bend prior to plane P1. A dead volume is also present at the left end of horizontal section.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 4
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

higher flows due to the jet ensuing from the inlet section, before undergoing a sharp bend before the inlet plane 
P1. This effect becomes more pronounced at higher temperatures, due to the interaction of flow and thermal 
inertia. From Figure 2, we can see that the pseudochannel is correlated with the inlet mixed cup velocity of the 
3D-CFD. The values of this mapping can be used in forms of a look-up table or in functional form (piece-wise 
linear mappings). It can be seen that the pseudochannel needs to have a lower velocity for increased residence 
time to achieve conversion predictions similar to the 3D-CFD values. With different initial guesses, the model 
converged to the same end result, assuring unique solution for a set of temperature and conversion values in the 
objective function.
The performance of the pseudochannel under steady state conditions is compared with that of the 3D-CFD 
and a conventional 1D-SCM in terms of outlet temperature and species conversion in Figures 3,  4, and 5. It 
is surprising how well a one-parameter model seems to be able to explain the non-linear flow maldistribution 
effects, predicting conversions more similar to that of a 3D-CFD simulation.
Figures 3,  4, and  5 show that the conversions of the pseudochannel match more closely with the CFD values 
and are better than the SCM results. The light-off trends are also captured accurately. As temperature varies 
from 375 K to 575 K, the species light-off of CO, followed by C3H6, occur and NO has a maximum conversion 
at intermediate temperature and the reversible oxidation to NO2. As CO reaches light-off condition in terms of 
temperature, the conversion of CO increases rapidly with temperature. This increase of the reaction rate, in turn, 
increases the temperature of the catalyst itself via the heat of reaction. Once CO conversion becomes saturated, 
the contribution of CO to the gradients of the objective function decreases. When CO is completely converted, 
it does not contribute to the gradients of the objective function. This trend repeats for other species like C3H6
and NO. The fitting method is still efficient, such that even when the species conversion progressively reaches 
saturation, the objective function is robust in predicting the residence time for pseudochannel. The temperature 
sweep at different values of GHSV provides the mapping, predicting the values and trends of conversion and 
light-off temperatures under the steady state conditions.
Transient simulations
Having tested the effectiveness of the pseudochannel model, the next test is to see the performance of the model 
when the system moves from one steady state to another, in terms of velocity (acceleration) and temperature 
(light-off). In general, flow maldistribution becomes more pronounced at higher mass-flow rates.
Figure 6 shows the outlet temperatures and species conversions of CO, C3H6 and NO when a step change 
from 0.018 kg/s to 0.028 kg/s is made at t =2 s. Qualitatively, the prediction trends are similar for all the models, 
for temperature and species conversion. Panel (a) shows a drop in temperature after the transient step change 
in mass flowrate. With an increase in the mass flowrate, the residence time decreases. As a consequence, the 
rates of reaction decrease, leading to a decrease in the outlet temperature from smaller exotherms. This trend is 
seen with all the three models. The temperature and residence time effects also influence species conversions. 
The predictions of the pseudochannel model are closer to the CFD predictions than 1D-SCM except for CO 
Fig. 2. Mapping of velocity of the pseudochannel with the corresponding mixed-cup inlet velocity from 
3D-CFD simulations for ten different inlet temperatures (350K to 575K in steps of 25K) at four different 
GHSVs. The 1:1 line is the diagonal line that specifies equal residence times of SCM and CFD. As the mapped 
points lie below this 1:1 line, the residence time in the pseudochannel will be longer, requiring the species to 
reside in the reactor longer to attain the same conversion as in 3D-CFD.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 5
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Fig. 4. Comparison of performances in terms of C3H6 conversion at four different GHSVs.
Fig. 3. Comparison of performances in terms of CO conversion at four different GHSVs.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 6
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

conversion. Since the inlet temperature is 475K, the conversion of CO is very high, nearly complete. 3D-CFD 
profile of CO conversion is lower than the 1D predictions due to that the flow maldistribution changes with the 
incoming mass flow rate. The temperature distribution is also modeled via radial heat transfer in the monolith 
in 3D-CFD, unlike the 1D models. With the mapped velocity applied to the pseudochannel, the predictions of 
this model are closer to the 3D-CFD results than the conventional SCM approach both before and after the step.
An important aspect of the NOx conversion is its dependence on complex reaction pathways and sensitivity 
to operating conditions. We can see from the kinetics that NO participates in the reduction reaction with 
C3H6 and in reversible oxidation to NO2. According to the Le Chatelier-Braun principle, any disturbance 
in conditions such as temperature, flowrate, or concentration will shift the equilibrium of the reversible 
NO +0.5O2 ←→ NO2 reaction to counteract the disturbance. This interplay can make the concentration of 
NO highly sensitive to operating conditions. The simultaneous occurrence of reduction and reversible oxidation 
reactions means NO participates in competing pathways. Further, the conversion of NO is influenced by 
reaction kinetics and transport effects, and stoichiometric limitations (availability of C3H6 and NO) can affect 
the observed NO levels. Despite these challenges, the developed pseudochannel model predicts conversions in 
good agreement with 3D-CFD simulation results.
Figure 7 shows the results of the temperature step transient. The step change occurs at t =2 s, where the 
temperature at the inlet increases from 375K to 475K. The pseudochannel predictions agree well with 3D-CFD 
predictions both before and after the step and outperforms the conventional SCM for the temperature transients 
too. An interesting feature is the thermal lag behaviour. The dynamic response observed in the 3D-CFD is a 
natural outcome of the model, as the radial heat conduction responsible for the emergence of “history effects” is 
accounted for. The SCM variants are characterized by a lumped thermal mass and therefore cannot predict the 
exact dynamics of the transient response to a change in temperature. This implies that as the inlet temperature 
changes, the CFD model is sensitive enough to predict the variation and retention times that results. The change 
is both felt sooner than the SCM variants (for the channels receiving the highest inlet velocities) and lasts 
for longer (for the channels receiving the lowest velocities). Although the pseudochannel SCM can produce 
predictions of conversion that are better matches to the CFD at the steady states before and after the temperature 
step, it cannot accurately describe the transient response of the reactor to these types of inlet variations.
Computational efficiency
All simulations, both 1D-SCM and 3D-CFD were carried out on an i7-processor powered desktop computer 
having 64 GB RAM. Reactive steady state simulations were carried out progressively starting from low 
temperature (350K) to high temperature (575K). The initialization was done at 350K and the converged 
solutions were subsequently used for the next higher temperature setting. The first set of steady state solutions 
were obtained in 18 minutes, thereafter, this solution time for other temperatures of the order of 30 minutes 
(the reason that higher temperatures require longer simulation times is due to the stiff kinetics). The 1D-SCM 
Fig. 5. Comparison of performances in terms of NO conversion at four different GHSVs.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

simulations were carried out with the ode15s solver in MATLAB. Nonlinear least squares optimization was 
also performed using the lsqnonlin function in MATLAB. The simulation time for the 1D-SCM cases was 
of the order of 2 minutes. The mapping procedure using nonlinear least squares was completed in 2-5 minutes 
for low temperatures (temperatures less than 450K) and high temperatures respectively (temperatures from 
450K). The total computational effort is detailed in Table 1. It is clear that the pseudochannel SCM has the same 
computational cost as a conventional SCM, but delivers results that are much more similar to full 3D-CFD. The 
only additional computational cost for deriving the velocity mapping underpinning the pseudochannel SCM 
comes from the steady-state CFD cases (30 minutes) and the fitting procedure (5 minutes). The mapping is 
geometry-specific, and it need only be derived once per geometry (and kinetic mechanism). From Table 1, the 
ratio of computational times for 3D-CFD and the pseudochannel model is 100 : 1, which indicates that CFD￾quality predictions of catalyst behavior in realistic flow maldistribution cases can be obtained at SCM-cost. 
These results open up for several applications like virtual calibration platforms, monitoring and control37, which 
today still rely on models of limited accuracy to achieve sufficient computational efficiency.
Discussion
In the view of stringent emission legislations, control algorithms dependent on the availability of ever faster and 
more accurate models. Traditionally, 1D-SCM are being used to get the exit concentrations of the emissions. 
These models are robust and offer good predictions when the conditions at the inlet of the catalyst are uniform. 
Flow maldistribution and coldstart are conditions which require models that are more detailed than the 
1D-SCM. CFD models can be used in these conditions to provide accurate results, but their use in control and 
monitoring is limited due to the large computational effort. Reduced order models provide the required accuracy 
at lower computational cost. In this work, a pseudochannel model is developed from steady reactive simulations 
through mapping of residence time and kinetics from 3D-CFD onto 1D-SCM. A one-parameter model in 
terms of residence time is capable of predicting conversions of the species by accurately characterizing the flow 
maldistribution via an alteration of the inlet boundary condition to a conventional SCM. The pseudochannel 
Fig. 6. Comparison of performances of 3D-CFD (CFD), 1D-SCM (classic-SCM) and pseudochannel (PC) 
models in terms of outlet temperature and species conversions for a transient velocity step at the inlet. The step 
change in mass flow rate occurs at t =2 s, from 0.018 kg/s to 0.028 kg/s, while holding temperature constant 
at 475K. This temperature is higher than the light-off temperature of CO. Panel (a) presents outlet temperature, 
panels (b), (c) and (d) are the conversions of species CO, C3H6 and NO respectively.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 8
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

does not represent any physical channel in the monolith, but is a fictitious channel whose inlet conditions have 
been arrived at via an optimization procedure that determines the inlet velocities an SCM must have to provide 
the equivalent exit conversion as a full-scale 3D-CFD simulation.
In place of the herein proposed one-parameter mapping, it is also possible to devise a two-parameter 
mapping by varying temperature and residence times simultaneously. This will produce a fictitious temperature 
and velocity set that has to be specified for the pseudochannel. As the thermal mass is significantly larger than 
the flow inertia, the large time constants of the thermal inertia bring about slower responses in the temperature 
field than in the velocity field28. Smaller velocity time constants make the system more sensitive to changes in 
inlet velocity. Moreover, this two-parameter mapping introduces additional constraints to be satisfied increasing 
the complexity. This can be tested in real driving cycles such as the World Harmonic Transient Cycle (WHTC) or 
Worldwide Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure (WLTP). The former is a technical regulation under more 
stringent emission regulations like Euro VI, and the latter is a set of standardised laboratory test procedures.
Details 3D-CFD 1D-SCM Pseudochannel
Steady-state reactive simulation 30 minutes 2 minutes 2 minutes
white lsqnonlin optimization - 5 minutes -
Transient reactive simulations 3 hours 5 minutes 5 minutes
Table 1. Comparative computational costs for steady-state and transient simulations and other associated 
processing steps.
Fig. 7. Comparison of performances of 3D-CFD (CFD), 1D-SCM (classic-SCM) and pseudochannel (PC) 
models in terms of outlet temperature and species conversions for a transient temperature step at the inlet. 
The step change in temperature occurs at t =2 s, from 375K to 475K, while holding mass flow rate constant 
at 0.028 kg/s (corresponding to a GHSV of 50000 h−1). This temperature step covers temperatures before 
and after the light-off temperature of CO. Panel (a) presents outlet temperature, panels (b), (c) and (d) are the 
conversions of species CO, C3H6 and NO respectively.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

The intrinsic ability to incorporate thermal history effects renders the CFD model superior to the 1D-SCM 
model variants that do not account for radial heat transfer. Consequently, the 1D-models show delayed responses 
to the changes in inlet temperature. To remedy this deficit in 1D-SCMs, there would be a need to develop 
model frameworks that represent the distribution of retention times of the real-world system, along with the 
intercommunication between different parts of the reactor through the solids material.
In terms of computational time, the pseudochannel model is as efficient as the 1D-SCM and much better 
than the 3D-CFD, while still producing results as accurate as the 3D-CFD. Being computationally efficient, 
pseudochannel models can possibly be further optimized for realtime monitoring and control. The pseudochannel 
model can be used for practical applications despite the limitations of thermal lag, as the velocity transients are 
captured well and velocity transients have smaller time constants.
Conclusion
A monolithic reactor has hundreds of parallel channels, and the resolution of all these channels in a simulation 
model is computationally very costly. This situation restricts the use of full-scale models in real-time monitoring 
and control applications. At the same time, the accuracy offered by such models is superior to that of conventional 
single-channel models (SCM) that cannot account for flow maldistribution.
In this work, a novel, computationally inexpensive pseudochannel model is presented for emission 
aftertreatment systems with flow maldistribution. This pseudochannel model is a fictitious single-channel model 
that more accurately represents the operation of a realistic catalytic converter, as compared to the conventional 
SCM. The key component of the pseudochannel model is a map of residence times that compensate for flow 
maldistribution effects. This map is obtained from an optimization problem in which the pseudochannel model 
is trained to reproduce species conversions in steady-state CFD simulations at different flow rates, holding 
temperature constant.
The performance of the developed pseudochannel model is compared with the full 3D-CFD solutions and a 
conventional SCM for the same nominal inlet velocities. In all the cases, the performance of the pseudochannel 
model is significantly better than the conventional SCM model. Relatively cheap steady-state reactive 3D-CFD 
simulations are thus used to derive a computationally effective pseudochannel model, offering a computationally 
inexpensive methodology for realistic systems with flow maldistribution. It is confirmed that the pseudochannel 
model agrees very closely with the 3D-CFD results under steady-state conditions, as well as for a velocity 
transient case. However, the sensitivity to capturing variation in retention times in a temperature step is limited 
due to the lumping of the thermal mass and the absence of radial heat transfer modelling. This is a known deficit 
in the conventional SCM and it is not rectified by the pseudochannel approach. It is suggested that this work 
be expanded to include thorough testing of the proposed procedure using a realistic driving cycle, such as the 
WHTC, and compare the performance of this model with real-time exhaust data and to explore the effectiveness 
of using smaller calibration data sets, and possible implementation of control algorithms for processes like NH3
-dosing in SCR.
Methods
We use steady state reactive CFD simulations in combination with non-linear least squares optimization 
to develop the pseudochannel model. An oxidation kinetic scheme in a catalytic converter is chosen and is 
represented by global kinetic rate equations from Pandya et al.38. It consists of five reactions occurring in the 
diesel oxidation catalyst, namely the oxidation of CO, H2, C3H6, reversible oxidation of NO to NO2 and 
reduction of NO by C3H6 as shown in Table 2. An exhaust gas mixture consisting of nine gases (CO, O2, C3H6
, NO, NO2, CO2, H2, H2O and N2) is used in the reactive simulations. The ideal gas law is used for all gases, 
and all thermo-physical properties are treated as functions of temperature. To this end, we follow the steps in a 
generic CFD simulation. These are described in the subsections below. The performance of the pseudochannel 
model is compared with the full CFD model and a 1D-SCM model. The methodology is described here with the 
model equations.
3D-CFD simulations were performed in ANSYS Fluent 2022R2. A pressure-based solver is employed to 
solve the conservation equations for mass, momentum, turbulent quantities, energy, and species. Accurately 
predicting recirculation patterns in the inlet diffuser, which lead to flow maldistribution, requires a reliable 
turbulence model. In this study, the SST κ − ω model, which combines the standard κ − ω and κ − ε models, is 
capable of accurately capturing turbulence across a wide range of Reynolds numbers. This turbulence model uses 
a blending function to transition from the standard κ − ω model near the wall to the high-Reynolds-number 
κ − ε model in the outer boundary layer. It is used with the low-Reynolds-number correction and production￾limiter options enabled, as this implementation offers improved accuracy over the commonly used κ − ε model.
The low-Reynolds-number correction in the SST κ − ω model is crucial for accurately modeling turbulence 
near the wall, where the velocity gradients are steep, by accounting for the effects of the viscous sublayer. This 
correction thus helps to provide an improved description of the flow behavior in the near-wall regions, at the 
expense of a finer mesh resolution.
Geometry and mesh
The geometry used in this study is chosen to replicate the flow phenomena in real world exhaust aftertreatment 
systems (EATS) with bends, recirculation zones, and dead volumes. As the current work is intended as a proof￾of-concept of the pseudochannel approach, the main criterion to be met by the geometry is that it should 
exhibit sufficient maldistribution, so as to not underestimate the effects. In other configurations, different flow 
maldistribution characteristics may be observed in practice39,40. The mapping produced (Figure  2) is thus 
geometry-dependent.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 10
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

The geometry employed in this study (cf. Figure 1) comprises two sections of uniform cross-section: a vertical 
section and a horizontal section. The vertical section is a pipe, measuring 60 cm in length and 3 cm in diameter, 
and it is connected to the horizontal section, which is 25 cm long and 10 cm in diameter. Flow from the vertical 
section enters the horizontal section at a 90-degree angle. Additionally, the horizontal section contains a catalytic 
unit consisting of a diesel oxidation catalyst (DOC) with dimensions of 9.5 cm in diameter and 9 cm in length. 
The DOC features a cell density of 400 cells per square inch (cpsi) and contains precious metal loaded at 10 g/ft3
, 
with a washcoat loading of 2.6 g/inch3
. This geometry has also been used in our earlier work28. The flow from the 
vertical inlet section produces a flow maldistribution at the entry section of the EATS. The full structure when 
meshed gives nearly seven hundred thousand hexahedral cells with 1.7 million faces and four hundred thousand 
nodes. The cell volumes ranged from O(10−13) and O(10−8) m3 representing the minimum and maximum 
volumes respectively. To accurately capture critical phenomena, targeted mesh refinement was employed in key 
regions, including the near-wall area, interfaces between catalytic and non-catalytic surfaces, and transitional 
zones such as the junction of vertical and horizontal sections. A cut section of the meshed view is shown in 
Figure 8. In the catalyst region, the aspect ratio of the cells varied between 0.6 and 2.86, ensuring a balance 
between accuracy and computational efficiency. A plane of symmetry halves the computational load.
1D modeling
The monolith has several hundreds of channels. The channels are the locations where catalytic reactions convert 
the emission gases to products. 1D modeling is used to obtain the concentration of species and temperature at 
the exit of the catalyst, by solving species conservation equations and an energy balance equation. It is assumed 
that the entire monolith can be characterized by a single channel, which in turn is described using the tanks-in￾series model.41
Component Material Balance for Species i
Reaction Global rate expression (kmol/mcat2, s)
R1: CO + 1
2 O2 −→ CO2
k1XCOXO2
G
R2: C3H6 + 7
2 O2 + 2NO −→ 3CO2 + 3H2O + N2
k2XC3H6XNOXO2
GG4
R3: C3H6 + 9
2 O2 −→ 3CO2 +3H2O
k2XC3H6XO2
G
R4: NO + 1
2 O2 ←→ NO2
k3
(
XNOX0.5
O2 − P −0.5XNO2 /KEQ)
G
R5: H2 + 1
2 O2 −→ H2O
k1XH2XO2
G
Adsorption inhibition factors:
G = G1G2G3
G1 =
(
1+ K1XCO + K2XC3H6
)2
G2 =1+ K3
(
XCOXC3H6
)2
G3 =1+ K4XNO
G4 =1+ K5XO2
Kinetic Constants:
k1 =1.93 × 1011 exp ( −51873
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
k2 =1 × 109 exp ( −90000
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
k3 =2.83 × 107 exp ( −21341
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
K1 = 648.6 exp ( 6574
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
K2 =2.21 × 104 exp ( 13226
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
K3 =5.792 × 1013 exp ( 40000
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
K4 =3.63 × 104 exp ( 4482
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
K5 =3.679 exp ( −67207
R
[ 1
T − 1
450 ])
ln(KEQ)=5.0462 + 6343.4
T − 2.2973 ln(T)+3.0315 × 10−3T − 8.2812 × 10−7T 2 +1.1412 × 10−10T 3
Table 2. DOC kinetics and global rate expressions by Pandya et al.38. Xi represents the mole fraction of 
species i, kj are rate coefficients, Kj are adsorption equilibrium constants, and Gj are inhibition terms. R is 
the universal gas constant, and T is the temperature (K).
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 11
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

dCi
dt = Ci0
τ − Ci
τ +
n
∑rxn
j=1
νijRj (4)
Energy Equation
Vρavgcp
dT
dt = qρavgcp(T0 − T)+ V
n
∑rxn
j=1
[
(−∆HT
r )νijRj
] (5)
Here, nrxn is the total number of reactions, V is the volume of a tank in the tanks-in-series model (m3
), Ci0 is 
the concentration (kmol/m3
) of the species i in the upstream tank (or at the inlet for the first tank), Ci is the 
concentration (kmol/m3
) of the species i in the current tank, T0 and T are the temperatures (K) in the upstream 
and current tanks respectively, νij are the stoichiometric coefficients for species i in reaction j, Rj is the rate of 
formation or depletion of species in the jth reaction (kmol/m3
,s), ρ is the density of the mixture (kg/m3
), cp is the 
specific heat capacity of the mixture (J/kg, K), and q is the volumetric flowrate of the mixture (m3
/s).
CFD modeling
The solution of the flow variables like velocities, temperature and species concentrations can be obtained by 
solving the conservation equations of the Reynolds-averaged formulation of the flow. The URANS (Unsteady 
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes) equations for continuity, momentum, energy, and species transport can be 
expressed as follows:
Continuity equation
∂ρ
∂t + ∂ρ⟨ui⟩
∂xi
=0 (6)
where ρ is the fluid density (kg/m3
), and ui is the velocity (m/s) in coordinate direction xi.
Momentum balance
∂
∂t (ρ⟨ui⟩)+ ∂
∂xj
(ρ⟨ui⟩⟨uj ⟩)= −∂⟨p⟩
∂xi
+
∂
∂xj
[
µ
(∂⟨ui⟩
∂xj
+
∂⟨uj ⟩
∂xi
)] +
∂
∂xj
(
−ρ⟨u′
iu′
j ⟩
) (7)
where µ is the fluid viscosity (Pa,s), p is the pressure (Pa), u′
i is the velocity fluctuation (m/s) in coordinate 
direction xi, and −ρ⟨u′
iu′
j ⟩ are the Reynolds stresses (Pa) .
The Reynolds stresses are modelled using the SST κ − ω model42. The two transport equations for the turbulent 
kinetic energy κ (m2
/m3
) and the turbulent dissipation rate ω (1/s), are given below.
Fig. 8. Cut section along the mid-plane of the computational domain, illustrating the mesh resolution inside 
and upstream the catalyst region. The flow enters from the vertical duct and exits towards the left.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 12
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Closure κ − ω equations:
∂(ρκ)
∂t +
∂
∂xj
(ρκ⟨ui⟩)= ∂
∂xj
((µ + µt
σk
)
∇κ
)
+
(
2µtS · S − 2
3
ρ∇κ⟨ui⟩I
)
− β∗ρκω (8)
∂(ρω)
∂t +
∂
∂xi
(ρω⟨ui⟩)= ∂
∂xj
((µ + µt
σω
)
∇ω
)
+ γ1
(
2ρS · S − 2
3
ρω⟨ui⟩
)
− β1ρω2 (9)
Here, S = 1
2
(
∇⟨ui⟩ +(∇⟨ui⟩)
T )
 is the strain tensor, β1 and β∗ are closure constants, σκ and σω are the 
turbulent Prandtl number for turbulent kinetic energy, κ, and specific dissipation rate, ω, respectively. µt is the 
turbulent viscosity (Pa,s). Menter provided additional information and a detailed explanation of the SST κ − ω
model and its model constants42. The turbulent transport contributions are modelled via the κ − ω model42 in 
the same way as in our previous work31.
Energy balance
∂ρ⟨E⟩
∂t +
∂
∂xi
[⟨ui⟩(ρ⟨E⟩ + ⟨p⟩)] = ∂
∂xj
[
keff
∂⟨T⟩
∂xj
+ ⟨ui⟩(τij )eff ]
+ Sh (10)
where E is the specific total energy (J/kg), keff represents the effective thermal conductivity (W/m,K), and 
(τij )eff represents the deviatoric stress tensor (Pa), which is used to represent viscous heating. Sh represents 
the source term (W/m3
) and includes the heat of reaction term, to be discussed in the kinetics section.
The deviatoric stresses are modelled as:
(τij )eff = µeff (∂⟨uj ⟩
∂xi
+
∂⟨ui⟩
∂xj
)
− 2
3
∂uk
∂xk
δij (11)
where µeff = µ + µt is the effective viscosity (Pa,s) and δij is the Kronecker delta.
Transport equation for species i
∂ρ⟨Yi⟩
∂t + ∂ρ⟨Yi⟩⟨uj ⟩
∂xj
= ∂
∂xj
(
ρDeff
∂⟨Yi⟩
∂xj
)
+Σnrxn
j=1 νijRj (12)
where Yi is the mass fraction of species i (-), Deff = Di + Dt is the effective diffusivity (m2
/s), Di is the mass 
diffusivity of species i in the mixture (m2
/s), Dt is the turbulent mass diffusivity (m2
/s), νij is the stoichiometric 
coefficient of species i in reaction j, and Rj is the source term (mol/m3
,s), the details of which are discussed in 
the kinetics section.
A porous medium approximation is used to describe the catalyst section of the geometry. Within the porous 
medium, laminar flow is enforced. The pressure drop due to the flow inside the catalyst is thus due to the viscous 
losses, and the permeability used is 2.74 · 107 m-2 in the flow direction and 2.74 · 1010 m-2 in the perpendicular 
directions.
Initial and boundary conditions
For the transient cases, the inlet boundary conditions are specified as functions of time at the velocity-inlet 
boundary. Turbulence boundary conditions are determined from an assumed turbulent intensity (5%) and 
length scale parameters. The turbulence intensity is assumed to follow Iturb =0.16Re−1/8, while the turbulent 
length scale is set to 7% of the hydraulic diameter of the inlet duct. At the outlet, a pressure-outlet boundary 
condition with zero gauge pressure is specified. Adiabatic no-slip boundary conditions are applied at the walls.
Solution methodology
The Semi-Implicit Pressure-Linked Equation (SIMPLE) method is employed to solve for pressure and velocity. 
The first-order Upwind Scheme is used in discretizing the convective terms for momentum, κ, ω, and energy. 
Pressure discretization achieves second-order accuracy, while diffusional terms are discretized with a second￾order accurate central differencing scheme. Transient terms are handled with a first-order implicit formulation. 
Regions of the mesh exhibiting significant gradients are refined as necessary, and this refined grid is thereafter 
used for obtaining solutions. Iterative convergence is evaluated through scaled residuals, which must decrease 
by at least three orders of magnitude within the iterations of a time step (or during the duration of a steady-state 
simulation). Additionally, total mass and energy balances are checked to ensure steady states, and convergence 
was also monitored by tracking a key property, such as temperature, on a defined plane and on points. In the 
transient simulations, the time step was chosen so as to maintain a global Courant number below unity.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 13
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

A mesh independence study was performed in which the sensitivity of solution variables to the mesh 
resolution was assessed on several meshes. As shown in Table 3, the effects of flow maldistribution were found 
to be well captured on a mesh of approximately 700,000 cells (mesh M2), which was thereafter used for the 
simulations.
The complete CFD model has been validated against the experimental results of Pandya et al.38 for steady￾state simulations on the temperature interval 300-600 K in our previous work31, where it was shown that the 
light-off temperature and the peak conversions and trends of CO and C3H6 agree well with the experimental 
values. Before that, the capability of the CFD model to correctly predict temperature maldistribution under non￾reactive conditions has also been validated against experimental data28.
Numerical simulations
Two distinct sets of reactive CFD simulations were conducted: the first involved steady-state reactive simulations 
at various GHSVs and inlet temperatures, while the second set comprised transient reactive simulations with 
step changes in temperature and mass flowrates. User defined functions (UDFs) were employed in ANSYS Fluent 
to specify the reaction rates. In the 1D-SCM model, the ODE solver ode15s is utilized to compute solutions for 
species balance and energy equations. The inlet concentrations of the species are given in Table 4.
Steady state reactive simulations were performed at four GHSVs, namely 40 000, 50 000, 750 000, and 100 
000 h−1, corresponding to 0.017, 0.018, 0.028 and 0.037 kg/s mass flowrates. Ten temperatures (350 K to 575 K 
in intervals of 25 K) were used for the inlet temperature. These variations gave 40 sets of operating conditions 
to obtain the mapped inlet velocity of the corresponding pseudochannel. The values of conversions of the three 
species namely, CO, C3H6 and NO, at the outlet plane of catalyst were chosen as the desired conversion in the 
objective function. The lsqnonlin algorithm would then provide the mapped value of SCM inlet velocity at 
every temperature that would be obtained from an SCM solution. This sequence is shown in Figure 9.
Two transient simulation variants were performed. The first, termed the velocity transient, is a step change 
in mass flowrate (velocity) holding temperature constant, and the second, termed the temperature transient, is 
a step in temperature holding mass flowrate constant. In the former, the mass flowrate steps up from 0.018 kg/s 
(corresponding to 50 000 h−1) to 0.028 kg/s (corresponding to 75 000 h−1). In the temperature transient, the 
two levels of temperature are 375 K and 475 K. The temperature levels are so chosen that CO-light off condition 
is captured. CFD simulations, SCM simulations with the actual nominal velocity (corresponding to the inlet 
mass flowrate and temperature) and the pseudochannel velocity are run and the results are compared to assess 
the performance. This sequence is shown in Figure 10.
Fig. 9. Schematic of steps in the steady state reactive simulation sequence.
Species CO O2 CO2 C3H6 H2 H2O NO NO2 N2
Concentration 100 ppm 6% 10% 350 ppm 33 ppm 10% 150 ppm 0 Remaining
Table 4. Species concentrations used in the steady state and transient simulations.
Mesh Total cell count Difference in area-weighted average velocity [%]
M1 634,669 0.08
M2 700,388 0.01
M3 758,759 0
Table 3. Mesh details for grid independence.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 14
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

Data availability
The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding 
author on reasonable request.
Received: 9 October 2024; Accepted: 7 February 2025
References
1. Share of GHG emissions and total energy supply in 2022. https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-tools/greenhouse-gas-emis
sions-from-energy-data-explorer ( last accessed on 20th Dec, 2024).
2. Distribution of greenhouse gas emissions in the european union (EU-27) in 2022, by sector. https://www.statista.com/statistics/13
25132/ghg-emissions-shares-sector-european-union-eu/ (last accessed on 20th Dec, 2024).
3. Leach, F., Kalghatgi, G., Stone, R. & Miles, P. The scope for improving the efficiency and environmental impact of internal 
combustion engines. Transp. Eng. 1, 100005 (2020).
4. Carbon dioxide emissions from the transportation sector worldwide from 1970 to 2023 (in billion metric tons). https://www.stati
sta.com/statistics/1291615/carbon-dioxide-emissions-transport-sector-worldwide (last accessed on 20th Dec, 2024).
5. Transportation-related nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions in the european union (EU-27) from 1990 to 2022. https://www.statista.
com/statistics/791209/nitrogen-oxide-emissions-european-union-eu-28 (last accessed on 20th Dec, 2024).
6. Teoh, Y. H. et al. A review on production and implementation of hydrogen as a green fuel in internal combustion engines. Fuel 333, 
126525. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2022.126525 (2023).
7. Emission standards. https://dieselnet.com/standards/eu/ld.php (last accessed on 20th Dec, 2024).
8. Heck, R. M., Farrauto, R. J. & Gulati, S. T. Catalytic air pollution control: commercial technology (John Wiley & Sons, 2012).
9. Emission control catalysts. https://dieselnet.com/tech/catalysts.php (last accessed on 20th Dec, 2024).
10. Hettel, M., Wörner, M. & Deutschmann, O. Computational fluid dynamics of catalytic reactors. Handbook of Materials Modeling: 
Applications: Current and Emerging Materials 1405–1438 (2020).
11. Kee, R. J., Coltrin, M. E., Glarborg, P. & Zhu, H. Chemically reacting flow: theory, modeling, and simulation (John Wiley & Sons, 
2017).
12. Heck, R. H., Wei, J. & Katzer, J. R. Mathematical modeling of monolithic catalysts. AIChE Journal 22, 477–484 (1976).
13. Koltsakis, G., Konstantinidis, P. & Stamatelos, A. Development and application range of mathematical models for 3-way catalytic 
converters. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 12, 161–191 (1997).
14. Pattas, K. et al. Transient modeling of 3-way catalytic converters (Tech. Rep, SAE Technical Paper, 1994).
15. Heck, R. H., Wei, J. & Katzer, J. R. The transient response of a monolithic catalyst support (ACS Publications, 1974).
16. Froment, G., Bischoff, K. & De Wilde, J. Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design (John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
17. Depcik, C. & Srinivasan, A. One+ one-dimensional modeling of monolithic catalytic converters. Chem. Eng. & Tech. 34, 1949–
1965 (2011).
18. Lundberg, B., Sjöblom, J., Johansson, Å., Westerberg, B. & Creaser, D. DOC modeling combining kinetics and mass transfer using 
inert washcoat layers. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 191, 116–129 (2016).
19. Walander, M. et al. Modelling of mass transfer resistances in non-uniformly washcoated monolith reactors. Emission Control 
Science and Technology 7, 153–162 (2021).
20. Rao, S. K., Imam, R., Ramanathan, K. & Pushpavanam, S. Sensitivity analysis and kinetic parameter estimation in a three way 
catalytic converter. Ind. & Eng. Chem. Res. 48, 3779–3790 (2009).
21. Hayes, R., Mukadi, L., Votsmeier, M. & Gieshoff, J. Three-way catalytic converter modelling with detailed kinetics and washcoat 
diffusion. Top. Catal. 30, 411–415 (2004).
Fig. 10. Schematic of steps in the transient reactive simulation sequence.
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 15
www.nature.com/scientificreports/

22. Lundberg, B., Sjöblom, J., Johansson, Å., Westerberg, B. & Creaser, D. Model-based experimental screening for doc parameter 
estimation. Computers & Chemical Engineering 74, 144–157 (2015).
23. Tu, M. & Balakotaiah, V. Low-dimensional models for real time simulations of monolith reactors with dual washcoat layers. 
Chemical Engineering Journal 429, 132153 (2022).
24. Joshi, S. Y., Harold, M. P. & Balakotaiah, V. Low-dimensional models for real time simulations of catalytic monoliths. AIChEJ 55, 
1771–1783 (2009).
25. Benjamin, S. F. & Roberts, C. A. Modelling warm-up of an automotive catalyst substrate using the equivalent continuum approach. 
Int J Veh. Des. 22, 253–273 (1999).
26. Canu, P. & Vecchi, S. Cfd simulation of reactive flows: Catalytic combustion in a monolith. AIChEJ. 48, 2921–2935 (2002).
27. Agrawal, G., Kaisare, N. S., Pushpavanam, S. & Ramanathan, K. Modeling the effect of flow mal-distribution on the performance 
of a catalytic converter. Chem. Eng. Sci. 71, 310–320 (2012).
28. Chanda Nagarajan, P., Ström, H. & Sjöblom, J. Transient flow uniformity evolution in realistic exhaust gas aftertreatment systems 
using 3d-cfd. Emiss. Control Sci. Technol. 8, 154–170 (2022).
29. Chanda Nagarajan, P., Ström, H. & Sjöblom, J. Numerical assessment of flow pulsation effects on reactant conversion in automotive 
monolithic reactors. Catalysts 12, 613 (2022).
30. Porter, S. et al. An assessment of cfd applied to steady flow in a planar diffuser upstream of an automotive catalyst monolith. SAE 
International Journal of Engines 7, 1697–1704 (2014).
31. Chanda Nagarajan, P., Ström, H. & Sjöblom, J. Methodology for reduced-order multichannel modeling of a catalytic converter. Ind. 
& Eng. Chem. Res. 63, 17462–17476 (2024).
32. Hayes, R., Liu, B. & Votsmeier, M. Calculating effectiveness factors in non-uniform washcoat shapes. Chem. Eng. Sci. 60, 2037–
2050 (2005).
33. Chakravarthy, V., Conklin, J., Daw, C. & D’Azevedo, E. Multi-dimensional simulations of cold-start transients in a catalytic 
converter under steady inflow conditions. Applied Catalysis A: General 241, 289–306 (2003).
34. Levenberg, K. A method for the solution of certain non-linear problems in least squares. Quarterly of applied mathematics 2, 
164–168 (1944).
35. Marquardt, D. W. An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear parameters. Journal of the society for Industrial and 
Applied Mathematics 11, 431–441 (1963).
36. lsqnonlin. URL: se.mathworks.com/help/optim/ug/lsqnonlin.html ( last accessed on 20th Dec, 2024).
37. Faghani, E., Andric, J. & Sjoblom, J. Toward an effective virtual powertrain calibration system. SAE Technical Paper 2018-01-0007
(2018).
38. Pandya, A., Mmbaga, J., Hayes, R., Hauptmann, W. & Votsmeier, M. Global kinetic model and parameter optimization for a diesel 
oxidation catalyst. Topics in Catalysis 52, 1929–1933 (2009).
39. Rusli, I., Aleksandrova, S., Medina, H. & Benjamin, S. The effect of swirl on the flow uniformity in automotive exhaust catalysts. 
SAE Technical Paper 01–2384 (2017).
40. Quadri, S., Benjamin, S. & Roberts, C. Flow measurements across an automotive catalyst monolith situated downstream of a planar 
wide-angled diffuser. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C: Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science 224, 
321–328 (2010).
41. Fogler, H. S. Elements of chemical reaction engineering (Pearson, 2020).
42. Menter, F. R. Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications. AIAA journal 32, 1598–1605 (1994).
Acknowledgements
The funding support from the Combustion Engine Research Centre (CERC) is gratefully acknowledged.
Author contributions
Conceptualization - PCN, HS, JS, Data curation - PCN, Formal analysis - PCN, HS, JS, Funding acquisition - JS, 
Investigation - PCN, HS, JS, Simulations - PCN, Project administration - HS, JS, Supervision - HS, JS, Writing - 
original draft - PCN, Writing - review and editing - PCN, HS, JS. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Funding
Open access funding provided by Chalmers University of Technology.
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.S. or J.S.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and 
indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s 
Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy 
of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports | (2025) 15:5082 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-89756-w 16
www.nature.com/scientificreports/