International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
Available online 11 May 2024
0017-9310/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
The mechanism by which thermal coupling leads to an asymptotic 
maldistribution stability boundary for flow boiling in parallel channels 
Md Emadur Rahman , Justin A. Weibel * 
Cooling Technologies Research Center, School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA 
ARTICLE INFO 
Keywords: 
Flow maldistribution 
Thermally coupled microchannels 
Two-phase flow instability 
Flow boiling 
Stability analysis 
ABSTRACT 
Phase change heat transfer processes are attractive for the efficient thermal management of advanced semi￾conductor devices, with flow boiling in parallel microchannel heat sinks being one promising solution. However, 
there are several implementation challenges associated with two-phase flow in parallel microchannels, partic￾ularly flow maldistribution, which can adversely affect performance and reliability. Two-phase flow models can 
be useful in predicting and understanding the instability mechanisms that leads to maldistribution, such that 
parametric performance trends and safe regions of operation can be identified. Channel-to-channel thermal 
coupling has been shown to alleviate maldistribution, but it is not yet understood why this effect is limited to 
some critical lateral thermal conductance above which there is no further benefit. In the current work, a two￾phase flow model with a lumped thermal capacitance representation of the heat sink wall is developed to 
identify the mechanism for this asymptotic maldistribution stability boundary for thermally coupled micro￾channels. The lumped model allows the nature of stability boundary to be explained via a scaling analysis of the 
eigenvalues. In such systems, it is identified that a single eigenvalue determines the occurrence of flow mal￾distribution. Scaling analysis shows that, for small values of thermal conductance, this eigenvalue becomes a 
quadratic function of thermal coupling, which enhances the stability of microchannels and moves the stability 
boundary. However, for large values of thermal conductance, the eigenvalue is dependent only on the fluid 
properties, leading to a limit at which thermal coupling can no further improve stability or affect the stability 
boundary. The lumped model developed in this work enables mechanistic understanding of the role of channel￾to-channel thermal coupling on mitigating flow maldistribution and therefore may offer important guidance on 
the design of flow boiling systems and heat sinks. 
1. Introduction 
Two-phase flow heat exchange processes are used in many industrial 
applications such as steam generation, air conditioning, and nuclear 
reactor cooling [1,2]. Flow boiling using parallel microchannel heat 
sinks is one such thermal management application that aims to enhance 
the reliability and performance of computing clusters, radar technolo￾gies, power conversion systems, and electric drive motors by efficiently 
dissipating intense, localized heat fluxes. Compared to single-phase 
operation, these two-phase heat sinks feature higher heat transfer co￾efficients, lower pumping power requirements, and more compact de￾signs. However, one practical challenge is the occurrence of flow 
maldistribution and instabilities that can degrade their heat transfer 
performance compared to uniform flow and stable operation [3]. 
In practical applications, microchannel heat sinks have many 
parallel channels (versus a single channel) to provide high heat transfer 
surface areas. However, this renders the heat sink further susceptible to 
flow maldistribution between these many parallel channels, triggered by 
Ledinegg instability or other flow instabilities (e.g., density wave os￾cillations, pressure drop oscillations, and temperature oscillations) un￾derlying flow instability mechanisms [4–9]. Flow maldistribution, as it 
pertains to the focus of this work, refers to a steady flow distribution that 
is non-uniform from channel to channel. 
1.1. The mechanism of steady two-phase flow maldistribution 
For a fixed heat input q′ to a single microchannel with subcooled inlet 
temperature Tin, the pressure drop ΔP demand curve as a function of 
mass flux Gch is a non-monotonic N-shaped curve (e.g., the solid red line 
or dashed green line shown in Fig. 1(a)). This N-shaped demand curve 
consists of three regions, a single-phase vapor outlet region where 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: jaweibel@purdue.edu (J.A. Weibel). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijhmt 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2024.125671 
Received 3 March 2024; Received in revised form 28 April 2024; Accepted 5 May 2024 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
2
pressure drop increases with mass flux (Region I), a liquid-vapor mixture 
outlet region where pressure drop decreases with mass flux (Region II), 
and a single-phase liquid outlet region where the pressure drop again 
increases (Region III); further description of the two-phase flow be￾haviors that lead to the trends in this curve is provided in [4]. The sta￾bility of the operating point, P0, located in the liquid-vapor mixture 
region depends on the pump characteristics [8,10]. For a fixed mass flux 
positive displacement pump (vertical dashed black line), the flow is 
stable for a single microchannel. For a constant pressure pump supply 
(horizontal orange dashed line), the system has three possible states of 
operation, and per the Ledinegg instability [10], the negative-slope 
Region II with a liquid-vapor mixture at the outlet is unstable leading 
to a flow excursion to the stable points. 
Extending the above discussion, there is also a pressure drop load 
curve for systems of multiple channels in parallel. For example, the inset 
plot within Fig. 1(a) shows the pressure drop load curve for two identical 
microchannel as a function of the total mass flux (Gin = Gch,1 + Gch,2). 
Apart from the N-shaped curve (solid black line) in the intermediate 
mass flux region, there are additional possible operating points (solid 
light blue lines) that arise due to the possibility unequal flow 
distributions. For parallel microchannels, one added constraint is that 
the pressure drop across each individual microchannel must be equal (i. 
e., ΔPch,1 = ΔPch,2). This condition can hold true for equal mass flux 
through both channels (Gch,1 = Gch,2), corresponding to the N-shaped 
black solid line in Fig. 1(a) (segments A-B, B-E, and E-F). For example, 
Fig. 1(b) shows the flow distribution at operating point, P0, where both 
parallel channels have the same two-phase exit quality. Alternatively, 
the pressure drop constraint can also hold true unequal mass flux 
through two parallel microchannels (Gch,1 ∕= Gch,2), corresponding to the 
solid light blue lines in in Fig. 1(a). Three possible combinations of 
unequal mass flow may exist for a system of two parallel microchannels, 
corresponding to each light blue segment. Namely, (i) the first channel 
at a very low mass flux and the second channel at an intermediate mass 
flux (segment B-C), (ii) the first at a very low mass flux and the second at 
a very high mass flux (segment C–D), and (iii) the first at an intermediate 
mass flux and the second at a very high mass flux (segment D–E). 
For the parallel channel system, the two-phase operating point P0 
with a desired uniform mass flux through channels, Gch,1 = Gch,2 =
Gin/2, is subject to a constant pressure drop constraint (ΔP = ΔPch,1 =
ΔPch,2) regardless of the pump characteristics. Hence the point is un￾Nomenclature 
Ac channel cross-section area (m2
) 
As heat transfer area (m2
), (4WcLc)
C Chisholm parameter 
Clat lateral thermal conductance per unit channel length (W/ 
mK) 
Co confinement number, [g(ρf − ρg)D2
h/σ]
− 0.5 
cp,ϕ vapor/liquid specific heat (J/kgK), ϕ = f, g 
cw heat sink wall specific heat (J/kgK) 
Dh hydraulic diameter (m) 
FF frictional pressure gradient 
FG gravitational pressure gradient 
fϕ friction factor (
2 τwρϕ
G2
in
)
, ϕ = f, g 
g acceleration due to gravity (N/m2
) 
Gch,i mass flux to channel (kg/m2
s), i = 1, 2 
G∗
ch,i equilibrium mass flux to channel (kg/m2
s) 
Gin total mass flux to channels (kg/m2
s) 
hconv,tp two-phase flow heat transfer coefficient (W/m2
K) 
hconv,ϕ vapor/liquid heat transfer coefficient (W/m2
K), ϕ = f, g 
hfb,i flow boiling heat transfer coefficient (W/m2
K) 
hnb nucleate boiling heat transfer coefficient (W/m2
K) 
h enthalpy (kJ/kg) 
hin inlet enthalpy of liquid (kJ/kg) 
hϕ liquid/vapor saturation enthalpy(kJ/kg), ϕ = f, g 
hfg Enthalpy of vaporization (kJ/kg) 
I identity matrix 
J Jacobian Matrix 
kϕ vapor/liquid thermal conductivity (W/mK), ϕ = f, g 
Lc length of channel (m) 
mw mass of heat sink wall (kg) 
M molecular weight (kg/kmol) 
p pressure (Pa) 
pcr critical pressure (Pa) 
Prϕ vapor/liquid Prandtl number (μϕcp,ϕ
kϕ
)
, ϕ = f, g 
Patm atmospheric pressure (Pa) 
Pin channel inlet pressure (Pa) 
Reϕo combined vapor and liquid Reynolds number, (Gch,iDh
μϕ
)
, ϕ =
f, g 
q′ heat transferred to fluid per unit length (W/m) 
q′
0 heat input to channel outer surface per unit length (W/m) 
Tf Fluid temperature (◦C) 
Tin inlet temperature (◦C) 
Tsat saturation temperature (◦C) 
Tw,i wall temperature (◦C), i = 1, 2 
T∗
w,i equilibrium wall temperature (◦C) 
t time (s) 
u velocity (m/s) 
Wc square channel width (m) 
Whs square heat sink wall width (m) 
x vapor quality (h− hf
hg − hf
)
z coordinate along channel length (m) 
ΔPch,i channel pressure drop (Pa) (Pin − Patm), i = 1, 2 
ΔPA acceleration pressure drop (Pa) 
ΔPF frictional pressure drop (Pa) 
δG∗
ch,1 perturbation of mass flux (kg/m2
s) 
δT∗
w,i perturbation of wall temperature (◦C) 
(
∂p
∂z
)
f liquid frictional pressure gradient (
2ff
vf(1− x)
2G2
Dh
)
(
∂p
∂z
)
g vapor frictional pressure gradient (
2fg
vgx2G2
Dh
)
Subscripts 
A acceleration 
F friction 
f liquid 
G gravitation 
g vapor 
i,j channel indices 
Greek symbol 
α void fraction 
β aspect ratio of channel (
Wc
Hc
)
λ eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix 
μϕ liquid/vapor dynamic viscosity (Pa⋅s), ϕ = f, g 
ρf liquid/vapor density (kg/m3
), ϕ = f, g 
ρw heat sink wall density (kg/m3
) 
σ surface tension (N/m) 
τw shear stress (Pa) 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
3
stable due to the Ledinegg instability, and the system will settle to a 
stable operating point with flow maldistribution. In the case of flow 
maldistribution, one channel may have such a low mass flux that all of 
the incoming liquid is evaporated and the exit becomes single-phase 
vapor, while the second channel has such a high mass flux there the 
liquid remains subcooled up to the channel exit, as illustrated in Fig. 1 
(c). Comparing the uniformly distributed flow in Fig. 1(b) to the mal￾distributed flow in Fig. 1(c), it is expected that the heat transfer coeffi￾cient would be deteriorated due flooding of one channel with liquid; the 
flow-starved microchannel with single-phase vapor at the outlet may 
also potentially initiate a premature critical heat flux (CHF). 
1.2. Literature review 
Although two-phase microchannel heat sinks provide very high heat 
transfer rates, many experimental works [9,11–15] have observed flow 
maldistribution owing to the Ledinegg instability. Maldistribution cau￾ses some channels to be starved of flow relative to a uniform distribu￾tion, and premature critical heat flux (CHF) can be triggered [16–18]. As 
a result, a number of control strategies have been explored to mitigate 
flow maldistribution, such as inlet restrictors [13,18,19], increased 
system pressure [20], and dynamic control of pumps and valves [21,22]. 
Nevertheless, these solutions either increase system complexity or lead 
to increased pressure drop. Hence, it becomes crucial to investigate the 
behavior of two-phase flow maldistribution in parallel channels and to 
formulate accurate models that aid in predicting and controlling the 
flow in two-phase heat sinks. 
A number of studies have experimentally characterized the flow 
maldistribution caused by the Ledinegg instability [9,11,14,15,23]. The 
notable, pioneering work of Akagawa et al. [23] investigated flow 
maldistribution in very long parallel evaporator tubes with 
millimeter-scale diameters. They experimentally obtained channel 
pressure drop curves for individual tubes to reveal the N-shaped load 
curve as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The flow distribution, excursion, and 
hysteresis phenomena were also observed in parallel tube experiments. 
A stability criterion was derived from a Laplace transformation of the 
linearized momentum and continuity equations for the system of par￾allel tubes, which explained the significant deviations from the uniform 
flow distribution when any one of the channel load curves had a nega￾tive slope. Miglani et al. [11] experimentally investigated the flow dis￾tribution and wall temperature in two isolated parallel microchannels. 
In their study, the effect of heat input on these quantities was measured. 
Flow distribution and wall temperature were found to be uniform at low 
heat input as with single-phase flow at subcooled conditions. Whereas at 
relatively higher heat input, once boiling started inside the channels, the 
flow distribution became unstable because of Ledinegg instability, 
which induced flow maldistribution in the channels. The wall temper￾ature in the starved-flow channels increased due to deteriorated heat 
transfer performance in that channel. In another work, Szczukiewicz 
et al. [13] performed experiments for visualization flow distribution and 
temperature in many parallel microchannels. In their study, the micro￾channels were prone to flow instabilities, backflow, and flow maldis￾tribution without any inlet restrictors, leading to high amplitude and 
high-frequency temperature and pressure oscillations. The recent work 
of Clark et al. [24] experimentally analyzed flow distribution in the 
parallel microchannel heat sink. In their work, some channels were 
repeatedly found to be flow starved, confirmed by high-speed flow 
visualization. During this condition, the average heat sink temperature 
was higher than with uniform flow through the channels. 
Minzer et al. [25] investigated flow distribution in two parallel 
channels with a simplified two-phase flow model where the channel 
pressure drop was calculated for flow boiling in each single channel. The 
governing model equations were used to obtain steady-state solutions 
for the flow distribution and inlet pressure of the channels. The transient 
equations were used to perform a linear stability analysis and predict the 
flow dynamics in parallel channels. Baikin et al. [26] extended the 
model of Minzer et al. [25] to four parallel channels and performed 
experiments with various combinations of heated and unheated chan￾nels. Flow maldistribution was observed even for the case of equal 
heating, confirmed via linear stability analysis, and transient simula￾tions verified the runaway trajectories from unstable operating points. 
Recently, Van Oevelen et al. [27] studied flow distribution for a large 
number of identical parallel microchannels (up to 200) as is commonly 
found in heat sinks. A generalized linear stability analysis was per￾formed to show that, even with a constant mass supply pump, the sta￾bility behavior of the system having many parallel microchannels was 
prone to flow maldistribution, and converged toward that system of 
constant pressure supply pump with increasing number of channels. 
The works discussed above all investigated the flow maldistribution 
for thermally isolated parallel channels, that is, without incorporating 
lateral thermal coupling (i.e., lateral heat transfer) between parallel 
channels. However, there may be a high lateral thermal conductance 
between channels manufactured within the same heat sink material, 
which plays a critical role in mitigating the flow maldistribution caused 
by the Ledinegg instability. Flynn et al. [28,29] experimentally 
measured a difference in temperature between two parallel micro￾channels etched into a substrate depending on whether the channels 
were either thermally coupled or thermally isolated, and attributed their 
observations to the effect of thermal coupling on the Ledinegg insta￾bility. In their studies, flow visualization confirmed the severe flow 
maldistribution in thermally isolated channels compared to thermally 
coupled ones. Due to maldistribution, the temperature difference be￾tween flow-starved and flooded channels was experimentally reported 
to be 40◦C, whereas thermally, it was less than 10◦C. Van Oevelen et al. 
[30] were first to model this effect of lateral thermal coupling on flow 
Fig. 1. (a) Pressure drop demand curve as a function of mass flux for flow 
through two identical microchannels subject to uniform heating with a sub￾cooled liquid inlet. The demand curve for each identical channel (solid red and 
green dashed lines) has three regions, Regions I, II, and III, based on channel 
exit quality. For two parallel channels, a demand curve has regions with equal 
flow through both channels (solid black lines) or maldistribution (solid light 
blue lines). (b) If point operating point P0 were stable, then both microchannels 
would have the same mass flux and two-phase exit vapor quality; (c) however, 
because P0 is unstable due to the Ledinegg instability, the flow becomes mal￾distributed and one microchannel has a lower mass flux (P2 with vapor at the 
outlet) while the other has a higher mass flux (P1 with a subcooled liquid 
outlet). In the illustrations above, it is assumed that the channels are thermally 
isolated from each other. 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
4
distribution in two parallel microchannels by extending their model 
from Ref. [27]. A finite volume discretization method was used to solve 
the model equations. The severity of flow maldistribution was compared 
for thermally isolated and thermally coupled parallel channels. It was 
found that the severity of flow maldistribution was significantly reduced 
for thermally coupled parallel channels because a channel experiencing 
local dryout could transfer some heat input to the neighboring channel, 
maintaining a more uniform wall temperature. Miglani et al. [9] 
confirmed this behavior by experimentally measuring the flow maldis￾tribution in two parallel channels and showing that the mass flux dif￾ference between the parallel channels was significantly reduced for 
thermally coupled parallel channels. A direct comparison between the 
experimental data and theoretical model predictions [30] showed good 
agreement. The model [30] was also validated against the experimental 
data of Flynn et al. [28,29], showing reasonable agreement. 
The above results demonstrate that the stability behavior of micro￾channels can be improved by allowing lateral heat transfer between the 
channels, which reduces the flow maldistribution severity. However, an 
important but unexplained observation from Ref. [30] is that the lateral 
thermal coupling is not guaranteed to avoid flow maldistribution. At low 
heat inputs, increasing the lateral thermal conductance shifts the sta￾bility boundary to the point where maldistribution can be avoided 
altogether; however, the effect of increasing thermal conductance be￾comes weaker and weaker as the applied heat input increases. Above 
some upper heat input threshold, the system is unstable and the 
microchannels are prone to maldistribution no matter how high the 
lateral thermal conductance. There is no available mechanistic expla￾nation for this asymptotic maldistribution stability boundary because 
the previous studies have used finite volume discretization solutions that 
do not permit physical interpretation of the system stability. Therefore, 
this current work develops a dynamic model for predicting and 
analyzing the flow distribution in parallel microchannels using a lumped 
capacitance representation of a heat sink that allows mechanism 
explanation of the effect of thermal coupling on the stability boundary. 
The reduced-order model is first shown to capture the correct trends in 
flow distribution, that is, the stability of the parallel microchannels in￾creases with lateral thermal coupling and reaches a limit at higher heat 
inputs. A single eigenvalue is shown to be the cause for flow maldistri￾bution for two parallel channels. Scaling analysis inspection of the terms 
in this eigenvalue then offers a mechanistic explanation for the 
asymptotic stability boundary behavior. 
2. Modeling approach 
Fig. 2(a) illustrates the system having flow through two identical 
microchannels placed in parallel with a common inlet and outlet header. 
The adjacent channels are thermally coupled via a lateral thermal 
conductance, Clat, representative of conduction between the channels 
through the heat sink wall. The system reduces to the case of thermally 
isolated channels when Clat = 0. The channels are subject to constant 
total mass flux Gin from a positive displacement pump at the inlet 
header. The mass flow splits and each microchannel receives some 
portion of the inlet mass flow; e.g., for uniformly distributed flow, 
G∗
ch,1 = G∗
ch,2 = Gin/2 at steady state conditions. Both channels also 
receive a uniform, equal heat input per unit channel length q′
0 on their 
outer surfaces. Subcooled liquid enters the channels at Tin and fluid exits 
as a subcooled liquid, liquid-vapor mixture, or superheated vapor, 
depending on the heat input per unit length and mass flux. While the 
conclusions drawn in this study are qualitatively generalizable, quanti￾tative results are shown for baseline microchannel dimensions and 
materials that are representative of applications for the thermal man￾agement of advanced semiconductor devices, with all model input pa￾rameters given in Table 1 and geometries defined in Fig. 2(b). 
2.1. Dynamic flow distribution model 
Transient governing equations are developed to analyze flow dis￾tribution in the parallel microchannel configuration defined by Fig. 2. 
The flow distribution model is adapted from our previous work on flow 
distribution in parallel channels [31]. A one-dimensional partial dif￾ferential momentum equation is derived that describes the flow for the 
1st microchannel as 
∂Gch,1
∂t +
∂
(
Gch,1u
)
∂z = − ∂p
∂z
− FF (1) 
where the first term on the left-hand side is rate of change of mass flux, 
the second term on the left-hand side is the acceleration pressure 
gradient, and FF is frictional pressure gradient. A simplified lumped 
dynamic momentum equation for the heat sink is obtained by inte￾grating Eq. (1) along the channel length from the inlet to the exit, and 
the new equation is given as: 
dGch,1
dt = 1
Lc
(Pin − Patm − ΔPF − ΔPA − ΔPG) (2) 
where Lc is the length of the microchannel, Pin and Patm are inlet and 
Fig. 2. (a) Schematic diagram of the scenario investigated to assess flow distribution in thermally coupled parallel microchannels; lateral heat transfer is possible 
when there is a temperature difference (Tw,1 ∕= Tw,2) between the channels depending on the magnitude of the lateral thermal conductance Clat. (b) Cross-sectional 
view of the thermally coupled parallel microchannel with relevant dimensions defined. 
Table 1 
Dimensions of the microchannel, system parameters, and operational 
parameters. 
Parameter Value 
Channel length, Lc (mm) 10 
Square channel width, wc (µm) 200 
Hydraulic diameter, Dh (µm) 200 
Heat input per unit length, q′
0 (W/m) 220–250 
Outlet pressure, Patm (kPa) 101 
Mass flux, Gin (kg/m2
s) 700 
Fluid Water 
Square heat sink wall, Whs (µm) 300 
Inlet subcooling, Tsat − Tin (K) 20 
Heat sink wall density, ρw (kg/m3
) 2329 
Wall specific heat capacity, cw (J/kgK) 700 
Lateral thermal conductance, Clat (W/mK) 0–600 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
5
outlet pressure of the microchannel, respectively, and ΔPF, ΔPA, and 
ΔPG are the frictional, acceleration, and gravitational pressure drop, 
respectively. The total pressure drop of the channel is ΔPch,1 = ΔPF +
ΔPA + ΔPG. 
Mass conservation across both parallel microchannel systems for a 
constant total mass flux at the inlet Gin can be written as follows: 
Gin = Gch,1 + Gch,2 (3) 
where Gch,2 is the mass flux through the 2nd microchannel. The known 
constant total mass flux Gin and the mass flux Gch,1 found by solving Eq. 
(2) provide enough information to obtain Gch,2 = Gin − Gch,1 from Eq. 
(3). Note that the distinction between the 1st and 2nd channel is arbi￾trary, given the symmetry of the system. 
The models used to calculate the microchannel pressure drop com￾ponents ΔPF, and ΔPA with wall thermal capacity are detailed in our 
previous work [4,31]. Note that when a wall thermal capacity is intro￾duced, the instantaneous heat input q′ to the fluid used for evaluating the 
pressure drop is not necessarily equal to the applied heat input q0
′ (i.e., 
q′ ∕= q′
0), which requires a separate dynamic thermal model, as is 
described in the next section. 
2.2. Dynamic thermal model 
Fig. 2 depicts the cross-section of the thermally coupled parallel 
microchannels receiving uniform heat input per unit channel length (q′
0) 
on the outer surface of the heat sink wall. The fluid temperatures in each 
channel are equal for a uniform fluid flow through both parallel 
microchannels, i.e., Tw,1 = Tw,2. In contrast, any non-uniform flow dis￾tributions will result in a wall temperature difference (Tw,1 ∕= Tw,2), 
resulting in lateral heat transfer from the 1st to the 2nd microchannel or 
vice versa via lateral thermal conductance (Clat). For flow maldistribu￾tion in a parallel microchannel heat sink with a finite thermal capacity, 
the fluid-to-wall temperature difference and convective heat exchange 
varies in a coupled manner, making the dynamic heat response more 
complex. These heat transfer processes are simultaneously considered in 
the modeling approach by considering the dynamic interaction between 
thermal wall capacity and fluid flow, in addition to lateral thermal 
coupling. Consequently, lumped thermal models for both the 1st and 
2nd microchannel are developed by balancing the sensible energy 
change with the heat input to the wall, the heat transferred from the wall 
to the fluid, and lateral heat transfer between the channels, expressed for 
the system as 
dTw,i
dt = q′
0Lc
mwcw
− hfb,iAs
(
Tw,i − Tf ,i
)
mwcw
− ClatLc
(
Tw,i − Tw,j
)
mwcw
(4) 
where, i ∕= j = 1,2 are the channel indices. The first term on the right￾hand side of Eq. (4) is the total heat input to the heat sink wall, the 
second term on the right-hand side is the internal convection heat 
transfer to the fluid (q′
), and the last term is the heat transfer due to 
thermal coupling between microchannels. The lateral thermal conduc￾tance, Clat, defines the strength of the thermal coupling. Also, mwcw is the 
wall thermal capacity, hfb,i is the flow boiling heat transfer coefficient of 
the i
th microchannel, and As is convective heat transfer area in the 
microchannel. The fluid temperature Tf,i of i
th microchannel is calcu￾lated by taking the length-weighted-average temperatures of the sub￾cooled liquid phase, vapor-liquid mixture, and superheated vapor phase 
along the flow length. 
The internal convection heat transfer to the fluid q′ = hfb,iAs(Tw,i −
Tf,i), where i = 1, 2, is dependent on the flow boiling heat transfer co￾efficient (hfb,i). calculated using the correlation from Bertsch et al. [32]: 
hfb = hnb(1 − x) + hconv,tp[
1 + 80(
x2 − x6
)
e− 0.6Co] (5) 
hnb = 55( p
pcr)0.12(
− log10(p
pcr))− 0.55
M− 0.5
⋅
(q′
0Lc
As
)0.67
(6) 
hconv,tp = (1 − x)hconv,f + xhconv,g (7) 
hconv,ϕ =
(
3.66 +
0.0668(
ReϕoPrϕDh
/
Lc
)
1 + 0.04(
ReϕoPrϕDh
/
Lc
)2/3
)
kϕ
Dh
(8) 
where hnb is the nucleate boiling heat transfer coefficient, hconv,tp is the 
two-phase flow heat transfer coefficient, and Co = [g(ρf − ρg)D2
h/σ]
− 0.5 is 
the confinement number. Liquid-only (Refo) and vapor-only (Rego) 
Reynolds numbers, when the entire mass flux through channel occurring 
as liquid/vapor phase, are given as Reϕo = Gch,iDh/μϕ, where ϕ = f, g. 
The heat transfer coefficient (hfb) of both microchannels is calculated by 
taking the length-weighted-average of the heat transfer coefficient for 
the subcooled liquid phase, vapor-liquid mixture, and superheated 
vapor phase along the channel. 
2.3. Eigenvalues of the dynamic system 
The governing Eqs. (2) and (4) can be rewritten in dynamical form as 
follows: 
X˙(t) = F(X, η) (9) 
where X = (Gch,1, Tw,1, Tw,2)
T are phase variables, and η = (q′
, Clat, Tin)
T 
are design and operating parameters. The equilibrium points of the 
current system can be obtained by setting the right-hand sides of the 
governing momentum Eq. (2) and energy Eq. (4) (or Eq. (9)) to zero such 
that: 
X˙(t) = 0 ⇒F(X, η) = 0 (10) 
The equilibrium points of the 1st channel from the momentum 
equation are: 
G∗
ch,1 = Gin
2 (11) 
where the asterisk denotes an equilibrium point. Therefore, the equi￾librium mass flux in the second microchannel is also G∗
ch,2 = Gin −
G∗
ch,1 = Gin/2. From the energy equation, 
T∗
w,i = Tf ,i + q′
0Lc
hfb,iAs
(12) 
Because the heat transfer coefficient and fluid temperature at the 
equilibrium operating conditions are equal for both parallel micro￾channels, it can be written T∗
w,1 = T∗
w,2. 
All these equilibrium points do not necessarily provide optimal 
performance, and sometimes undesirable flow maldistribution induced 
by the Ledinegg instability and other instabilities may occur. A general 
stability analysis is performed to find the stable and unstable equilib￾rium operating points. The stability of the equilibrium operating points 
(G∗
ch,1, T∗
w,1, T∗
w,2) are assessed by inspecting the eigenvalues of the Ja￾cobian matrix (J) obtained from the governing Eqs. (2) and (4). By 
taking the partial derivative of Eq. (10) with respect to phase variables, 
the Jacobian matrix of the present system is written as follows: 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
6
J =
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎣
− 1
2Lc
(∂ΔPch,2
∂Gch,1
+
∂ΔPch,1
∂Gch,1
)
− 1
2Lc
∂ΔPch,1
∂Tw,1
1
2Lc
∂ΔPch,2
∂Tw,2
Ashfb,1
mwcw
∂Tf ,1
∂Gch,1
− hfb,1As − ClatLc
mwcw
ClatLc
mwcw
− Ashfb.2
mwcw
∂Tf ,2
∂Gch,1
ClatLc
mwcw
− hfb,2As − ClatLc
mwcw
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦
(13) 
The components of the Jacobian matrix depend on many system and 
operating parameters, including the lateral thermal conductance and 
heat input to fluid. To simplify the terms for subsequent presentation, J 
is rewritten as: 
J =
⎡
⎣ a − b b
− c d e
c e d
⎤
⎦ (14) 
where a, b, c, d, and e are defined by the matrix entries in Eq. (13), for 
example, e = ClatLc
mwcw
. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian are obtained by 
solving the characteristic equation, 
|J − λI| = 0 (15) 
where I is the identity matrix and the Eq. (15) is rewritten as follows: 
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
a − λ − b b
− c d − λ e
c e d − λ
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
⃒
= 0 (16) 
So, the characteristic polynomial obtained by solving the above 
determinant is, 
λ3 − (a + 2d)λ2 − (
2bc − 2ad − d2 + e2
)
λ + 2bcd − ad2 + 2bce + ae2 = 0
(17) 
and the calculated eigenvalues λ from this Eq. (17) are given below as: 
λ1 = d + e (18a) 
λ2 = 1
2
(
a + (d − e)−
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(a − d + e)
2 + 8bc √ )
(18b) 
λ3 = 1
2
(
a + (d − e) +
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(a − d + e)
2 + 8bc √ )
(18c) 
The derived eigenvalues are functions of the lateral thermal 
conductance and heat input. For instance, the terms a, b, and c depends 
on the heat input, the term d depends on the heat input and lateral 
conductance, and the term e is a function of the lateral conductance 
only. The eigenvalues can be inspected to analyze the effect of these 
parameters on the equilibrium points to demarcate operating regions 
with maldistribution (unstable equilibrium points), where at least one of 
the eigenvalues has a positive real part, versus region with uniform 
distribution (stable equilibrium points) where all the eigenvalues have a 
negative real part. Therefore, the forms of these eigenvalue expressions 
can confirm the nature of how thermal coupling stabilizes systems of 
parallel microchannels. 
2.4. Transient solution of the flow distribution 
The governing equations offer a dynamic model for analyzing the 
transient flow distribution and wall temperature as a function of the 
thermal coupling between parallel microchannels. The transient 
response of the system is obtained by numerically solving the set of 
ordinary differential Eqs. (2) and (4) using the MATLAB odes15s func￾tion, which is chosen as these equations are stiff. This function uses a 
variable-step, variable-order (VSVO) solver based on the numerical 
differentiation formulas (NDF) of orders 1 to 5 [33]. This solves the 
equations as initial values problems (IVP), where the initial values are 
perturbed equilibrium points (G∗
ch,1 ± δGch,1; T∗
w,1 ± δTw,1; T∗
w,2 ± δTw,2). 
3. Results and discussions 
In these results, Section 3.1 first identifies the operating regions 
corresponding to uniformly distributed versus maldistributed flow, ob￾tained by the stability analysis approach as described in Section 3.1. 
Next, Section 3.2 presents the transient system response for various 
lateral thermal conductances and heat inputs that result in different flow 
distributions, obtained via transient solution of the governing equations 
as described in Section 2.4. The dependence of the system eigenvalues 
on various design and operating parameters is then discussed in detail 
(Section 3.3). Section 3.3.1 reveals that the first and second eigenvalues 
do not participate in determining the flow distribution of the system. 
Section 3.3.2 describes the role of the third eigenvalue in governing the 
flow distribution as a function of thermal coupling and heat input, and a 
scaling analysis of the third eigenvalue in Section 3.3.3 explains the 
asymptotic nature of the stability boundary. Lastly, Section 3.4 explores 
the dynamic response for scenarios at which the stability boundary is has 
asymptotically converged; although maldistribution is guaranteed in 
microchannels for sufficiently high heat inputs, thermal coupling can 
nevertheless reduce the severity of the wall temperature difference in 
the presence of maldistribution. 
3.1. Mapping the regions of flow stability and maldistribution 
The eigenvalues of the parallel microchannel system depend on 
several operational and design parameters as governed by Eq. 16. 
Therefore, a stability map is generated by calculating the eigenvalues of 
the Jacobian matrix for varying lateral thermal conductance Clat from 
0–600 W/mK and heat input q′ from 228–242 W/m. All other design and 
operating parameters are kept constant, as given in Table 1. Stable re￾gions will have uniform flow distribution and unstable regions will have 
flow maldistribution, assessed per the sign of the positive real parts of 
the eigenvalues as discussed in Section 2.3. 
Fig. 3 displays a stability map for the parallel microchannels in the 
parametric plane of the lateral thermal conductance Clat and heat input 
q′
, where blue marked points indicate stable flow (no marks are shown 
Fig. 3. Stability map showing over the parametric plane of lateral thermal 
conductance (Clat) and heat input (q′
) to the system of two thermally coupled 
parallel channels. The map demarcates the unstable (maldistribution) and 
stable (no maldistribution) regions, where the stable region is indicated by blue 
marks. Filled red triangle symbols indicate specific operating points at which 
the transient flow distribution dynamics are discussed in Sections 3.2 and 3.4. 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
7
for unstable flow). The entire plane is divided by a stability boundary 
between maldistributed (unstable) and uniformly distributed (stable) 
flow. It is evident from the figure that the flow is always stable for low 
heat inputs q′ <230 W/m, below the threshold at which the liquid rea￾ches the saturation temperature at the outlet of microchannels for uni￾form flow distribution. This is because, as reviewed in Section 1.1, the 
Ledinegg instability mechanism only occurs in the intermediate mass 
flux region where there is a vapor-liquid mixture at the channel outlet. 
Without any lateral thermal conductance (Clat ≈ 0), the flow becomes 
maldistributed for any heat input q′ > 230 W/m. The stability of 
microchannels improves with increasing non-zero thermal coupling. 
Hence, the stability boundary increases to higher heat inputs with 
increasing lateral thermal conductance, as observed in Fig. 3. The trend 
in the stability boundary with increasing thermal coupling depicts a few 
distinct characteristics. Initially, there is a steep increase in the stability 
boundary from zero to low lateral thermal conductance. However, this 
stability enhancement asymptotically converges to a particular heat 
input at very high lateral thermal conductance, indicating that no level 
of thermal coupling can avoid maldistribution above this heat input. The 
same asymptotic maldistribution stability boundary has been previously 
observed (but not explained) via the finite volume simulations of Van 
Oevelen et al. [30], confirming that the currently developed lumped 
model can accurately captures the effect of thermal coupling on flow 
maldistribution. 
The enhancement of stability with thermal coupling can be generally 
explained as follows. In the absence of thermal coupling, heat transfer 
from one channel to the other is prohibited; any perturbation in mass 
flux unstably grows due to the negative slope of the single-channel load 
curve (i.e., a slight reduction in flow rate to one channel increases the 
pressure drop and causes a further flow rate reduction in an excursive 
manner). This leads to a highly maldistributed flow where one channel 
gets much less mass flux than the other to equalize the pressure across 
both channels. As a result, the wall temperature in the flow-starved 
channel is also becomes higher than the other channel. However, with 
the mechanism of thermal coupling enabled, this increasing wall tem￾perature of the flow-starved channel causes heat transfer to the other 
channel via thermal conduction between the two channels. With suffi￾cient thermal conductance, this allows the flow-starved channel to re￾turn to back its initial condition after releasing the heat stored in the 
channel wall. While this improvement to stability is simply explained, it 
is not trivial to understand why the improvement to stability asymptotes 
with increasing thermal coupling. The modeling approach implemented 
in the current work offers a mechanistic explanation of this trend in the 
stability boundary, as will be discussed in the upcoming sections. 
3.2. Dynamic system response for stable versus unstable conditions 
The previous Section 3.1 introduced the stability map for the present 
system having two distinct regions associated with uniformly distributed 
and maldistributed flow in the parametric plane of lateral thermal 
conductance (Clat) versus applied heat input (q′
). However, this map can 
only predict the occurrence of maldistribution via stability analysis, 
whereas in this Section 3.3, the transient governing equations are solved 
to analyze the flow maldistribution dynamics and its effect on the wall 
temperature. 
The two operating points for which these transient simulations are 
performed lie on either side of the stability boundary for lateral thermal 
conductances of 30 and 120 W/mK at q′ = 235 W/m. The rest of the 
design and operating parameters are as specified in Table 1. The lower 
lateral conductance corresponds to a point in the unstable region, while 
the higher is in the stable region, both marked as red filled triangles in 
Fig. 3. 
Fig. 4 shows the temporal behavior of the mass flux and wall tem￾perature in the parallel microchannels, with flow maldistribution (Fig. 4 
(a and b)) and without flow maldistribution (Fig. 4(c and d)). Fig. 4(a) 
shows the transient mass flux with the occurrence of maldistribution for 
a low lateral thermal conductance. With an external disturbance to the 
steady state operating point, the mass flux in both channels diverges in 
opposite directions from the initially uniform mass flux Gch,1 = Gch,2 =
700 kg/m2
s (as shown in the zoomed inset). Once the system has sta￾bilized, one microchannel is flooded with nearly all of the available mass 
flux Gch,1 = 1380 kg/m2
s, while the other is starved of fluid, Gch,2 = 2 g/ 
m2
s. These two new stable operating points correspond to P1 and P2 as 
discussed in introduction section, Fig. 1. As a result, flow through the 
microchannels remains maldistributed, which affects the wall temper￾atures as plotted in Fig. 4(b). The uniform initial mass flux means that 
both microchannels initially have the same wall temperature. The wall 
temperatures start to deviate from this condition as soon as the mass 
fluxes become non-uniform. The channel receiving the lower mass flux 
has vapor at the channel outlet, corresponding to a deteriorated heat 
transfer coefficient and increased wall temperature. The difference in 
the wall temperatures reaches a maximum when uneven mass flux first 
Fig. 4. Transient (a,c) mass flux and (b,d) wall temperature for flow through 
two parallel microchannels at q′ = 235 W/m, where different line styles (solid 
versus dotted) are used to distinguish between the response of each channel. (a, 
b) corresponds to a case with maldistribution (Clat = 30 W/mK) whereas (c,d) 
corresponds to a case without maldistribution at a higher lateral thermal 
conductance (Clat = 120 W/mK). 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
8
reaches its absolute peak, and eventually settles to a fixed difference. 
Fig. 4(c and d) exhibits the flow distribution and wall temperature of 
the microchannels for a higher lateral thermal conductance in a stable 
region (no maldistribution). Following a small flow disturbance, the 
mass flux through the microchannels slowly converge with time till both 
have the same uniform flow. As described above at the end of Section 
3.1, this stability occurs because when one microchannel has a lower 
mass flux and the wall temperature tries to increase, i.e., Tw,1(t) > T∗
w,1; 
the increased thermal coupling enables sufficient heat transfer between 
the microchannels such that the system can returns to the uniform dis￾tribution. This process of heat transfer prevents the microchannels from 
developing flow maldistribution, whereas in the case of the lower lateral 
thermal conductance Clat = 30 W/mK, the heat transfer between 
microchannels is insufficient to mitigate the flow maldistribution. 
3.3. Dependence of eigenvalues on parameters 
The stability map of flow maldistribution shown in Fig. 3 is based on 
evaluation of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix for the present 
system. If at least one eigenvalue has a positive real part, the flow is 
unstable. With the effect of lateral thermal coupling on flow maldistri￾bution established above, this section explains these trends based on the 
dependency of the eigenvalues on the heat input and lateral thermal 
conductance. 
Fig. 5 plots representative eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix 
calculated as a function of the heat input in the presence of a given 
lateral thermal conductance (Clat = 120 W/mK). The vertical axis in￾dicates the value of the real part of the eigenvalues, with emphasis on 
whether these are positive or negative with respect to the solid black 
horizontal zero line. It is observed from the figure that for lower heat 
inputs q′ < 230 W/m for which the subcooled liquid entering the channel 
does not reach the saturation temperature at the outlet, all three ei￾genvalues have negative real parts. So, for these powers, the uniform 
flow distribution inside the microchannels is stable. As the heat input 
applied to the microchannels further increases to q′ > 230 W/m, the 
third eigenvalue, λ3, (red dotted line) starts to increase toward the 
positive side of the axis. This eigenvalue λ3 remains negative between 
230 W/m < q′ ⪅ 236 W/m, and hence there is no maldistribution despite 
flow boiling in the channels owing to the thermal coupling. However, for 
a high heat input q′ > 236 W/m, this eigenvalue becomes positive and 
maldistribution appears. The star points on the curve of λ3 correspond to 
points on a vertical dashed line of Fig. 4 where these points are stable (no 
maldistribution) at q′ = 230 W/m, near to the stability boundary (but on 
the stable side) at q′ = 235 W/m, and unstable (maldistribution) at q′ =
242 W/m. Alternatively, the first and second eigenvalues of the system 
(λ1 and λ2) always lie on the negative side of the axis for the entire range 
of heat input. 
3.3.1. Scaling analysis of the first and second eigenvalues 
It was observed in Fig. 5 that the real parts of the first and second 
eigenvalues (λ1 and λ2) were always negative (stable) for a specific value 
of lateral thermal conductance Clat = 120 W/mK. A scaling analysis in 
this subsection demonstrates that these two eigenvalues will remain 
negative for all possible values of heat input and lateral thermal 
conductance. 
The first eigenvalue is written here again 
λ1 = d + e = − hfb,1As − ClatLc
mwcw
+
ClatLc
mwcw
= − hfb,1As
mwcw
< 0 (19) 
where the simplified expression only contains the convective heat 
transfer coefficient hfb,1, the heat transfer area of the microchannel As, 
and the specific thermal capacity of the heat sink mwcw. All these 
quantities are universally positive, and as a result, λ1 will always remain 
negative. Furthermore, it is independent of lateral thermal coupling. 
The second eigenvalue λ2 is a non-trivial function of a, b, c, d and e, 
the components of J as defined by Eqs. (14) and (15): 
λ2 = 1
2
(
a + (d − e)−
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(a − d + e)
2 + 8bc √ )
(20) 
If the term outside of the squared root is less than the squared root 
term for any heat input and lateral thermal coupling, then the real part 
of λ2 is negative. We first inspect the difference between d and e as 
follows: 
(d − e) = − hfb1As − ClatLc
mwcw
− ClatLc
mwcw
=
(
λ1 − 2ClatLc
mwcw
)
< 0 (21) 
It is established that λ1 is always negative, and the thermal conduc￾tance Clat and microchannel length Lc cannot be negative, so (d − e) is 
always negative. Therefore, the sign of λ2 depends only the comparative 
values of a versus 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(a − d + e)
2 + 8bc √
. The term (a − d + e)
2 =
{a − (d − e)}2 is always positive and greater than a by inspection 
because (d − e) < 0. Additionally, the term 8bc is always greater than 
zero because the partial derivative of channel pressure drop with respect 
to wall temperature b = (∂ΔPch,2 /∂Tw,2)/2Lc is positive, and 
c = − Ashfb.1(∂Tf,1 /∂Gch,1)/mwcw is also positive. As a result, this confirms 
that 
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(a − d + e)
2 + 8bc √
> a and therefore λ2 < 0. This scaling analysis 
confirms that the second eigenvalue λ2 always remains negative and 
does not cause flow maldistribution in the parallel microchannel system. 
By deduction, the third eigenvalue λ3 solely cause flow maldistribution 
in the current system. 
3.3.2. Dependence of the third eigenvalue on lateral thermal coupling 
This section analyzes the dependency of the third eigenvalue λ3 on 
the magnitude of heat input and lateral thermal coupling. Fig. 6 plots λ3 
as a function of heat input for multiple different increasing values of the 
lateral thermal conductance 5 < Clat < 500 W/mK. As described earlier 
in Fig. 6, λ3 is negative below q′ = 230 W/m for which there is subcooled 
liquid exiting the channel. For q′
>230 W/m, λ3 immediately crosses 
from negative to positive and the system is unstable if the lateral thermal 
coupling is zero or negligible. With increasingly non-zero lateral thermal 
coupling, this crossover from negative to positive is delayed to higher 
heat inputs. For example, the eigenvalue λ3 remains negative for a small 
additional range of heat input 230 ⪅ q′ < ~231 W/m for a lateral 
thermal conductance Clat = 10 W/mK. Whereas a larger lateral thermal 
conductance Clat = 100 W/mK offers a wider range of stability for heat 
Fig. 5. Dependency of the system eigenvalues λ1, λ2, and λ3 with respect to the 
heat input q′ for a given lateral thermal conductance (Clat = 120 W/mK). The 
first and second eigenvalues λ1 and λ2 remain negative for all heat inputs 
whereas the third eigenvalue λ3 becomes positive at some particular heat input. 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
9
inputs 230 ⪅ q′ ⪅235 W/m. These λ3 values confirm that higher thermal 
coupling has a more substantial effect on mitigating maldistribution. 
However, the improvement to flow stability comes to an end after the λ3 
curve converges to a single line that crosses from negative to positive at a 
fixed heat input of q′ = 240 W/m for very large lateral thermal 
conductance (in the present case Clat⪆ 300–500 W/mK). This converged 
λ3 profile is consistent with the asymptotic stability boundary as shown 
in Fig. 3. A scaling analysis of λ3 in the next Section 3.3.3 explains this 
convergent behavior. 
3.3.3. Scaling analysis of the third eigenvalue to explain the asymptotic 
stability boundary 
This section describes the underlying reason why the stability 
boundary for flow boiling in parallel microchannels is asymptotic with 
increasing lateral thermal coupling, i.e., that there is a limit to miti￾gating maldistribution, via scaling analysis of the third eigenvalue λ3 in 
the limit of high thermal conductance. The third eigenvalue is written 
below: 
λ3 = 1
2
(
a + (d − e) +
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(a − d + e)
2 + 8bc √ )
(22) 
The components d = ( − hfb1As − ClatLc)/mwcw and e = ClatLc /mwcw 
are proportional functions of the thermal coupling coefficient; the term 
(d − e) is always negative and becomes increasingly negative with ther￾mal coupling. Hence, in the limit of high Clat, (a − d + e)
2 =
(a − (d − e))2 becomes significantly larger than 8bc which only depends 
on thermodynamic properties via b and c, and therefore ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
(a − d + e)
2 + 8bc √
≈ a − d + e. 
After considering these scaling assumptions, in the limit of Clat→∞, 
the third eigenvalue reduces to simply: 
λ3 ≈ a (23) 
It hence only depends on the Jacobian element a 
= − (∂ΔPch,1 /∂Gch,1 +∂ΔPch,2 /∂Gch,2)/2Lc defining the slope of micro￾channel pressure drop depending on the thermodynamic properties 
calculated based on heat input to microchannels, regardless of the 
thermal coupling coefficient. Therefore, λ3 becomes dictated by only the 
fluid thermophysical properties at sufficiently high lateral thermal 
coupling. It is confirmed via stability and scaling analysis using our 
novel lumped model that fluid properties ultimately govern the stability 
behavior in the limit of high lateral thermal coupling, posing a limit to 
which lateral thermal coupling can altogether avoid flow maldistribu￾tion. This explains the mechanism behind the asymptotic nature of the 
flow maldistribution stability boundary with increasing lateral thermal 
coupling. 
3.4. Intensity of thermal coupling coefficient in maldistribution region 
It is established in the previous sections that only the third eigen￾value (λ3) participates in causing the flow maldistribution. Moreover, 
scaling analysis of this eigenvalue explains why the impact of lateral 
thermal coupling reaches a limit in preventing maldistribution. 
Although the linear stability behavior is limited, this section reveals that 
lateral thermal coupling can nevertheless reduce the consequences of 
flow maldistribution, even when it cannot be avoided altogether. 
Here we analyze the flow dynamics in the unstable region at applied 
heat input of q′ = 242 W/m and lateral thermal conductances of Clat = 50 
W/mK and Clat = 500 W/mK corresponding to the filled triangle in 
Fig. 3, with all other quantities as specified in Table 1. Fig. 7 plots the 
transient (a) mass flux and (b) wall temperature for the above conditions 
when subjected to a perturbation from the uniformly distributed flow 
state. Both higher lateral thermal conductance (Clat = 500 W/mK) and 
smaller lateral thermal conductance (Clat = 50 W/mK) cases eventually 
exhibit flow maldistribution as expected based on the linear stability 
analysis as shown in Fig. 7(a). However, the heat sink wall temperature 
dynamics are still affected by lateral thermal coupling, as shown in Fig. 7 
Fig. 6. Functional dependence of the third eigenvalue λ3 for varying lateral 
thermal conductance and heat input. There is a shift in the heat input at which 
the value becomes positions for increasing Clatfrom 0 to ≈ 200 W/mK; however, 
further increases in Clat ⪆ 300–500 W/mK no longer affect λ3. 
Fig. 7. Effect of lateral thermal coupling on (a) mass flux maldistribution and 
(b) wall temperature difference for both high (dotted lines; Clat = 500 W/mK) 
and low (solid lines; Clat = 50 W/mK) lateral thermal conductance. 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
10
(b). Prior to maldistribution, the wall temperatures are equal for both 
microchannels. In both cases wall temperature difference between 
microchannels appears as soon as flow maldistribution occurs. However, 
the temperature difference between microchannels is more severe for 
lesser thermal coupling, leading to a higher maximum temperature in 
the flow-starved channel. The lesser temperature difference between the 
channels for the higher lateral thermal coupling can be attributed to 
lateral heat transfer. Therefore, although the parallel system is linearly 
unstable, causing flow maldistribution, the consequences such as risk of 
thermal runaway or thermal stressed are nevertheless reduced. 
4. Conclusions 
Flow maldistribution in parallel boiling microchannels, and the ef￾fect of lateral thermal coupling, are analyzed using a lumped flow 
model. A stability analysis performed using the developed model reas￾serts the influence of lateral thermal coupling on flow maldistribution 
found in earlier studies using more complex numerical flow models. 
Namely, without thermal coupling, flow maldistribution occurs in par￾allel microchannels for any heat input that causes the subcooled inlet 
liquid to boil before exiting the channel. With thermal coupling, flow 
maldistribution can be avoided up to higher heat input thresholds. 
However, in the limit of very large thermal coupling, it no longer pro￾vides a benefit in terms of linear stability, and there is a critical heat 
input above which the flow maldistribution occurs regardless of thermal 
coupling. 
This asymptotic nature of the maldistribution stability boundary is 
explained for the first time in this work, owing to the ability to assess the 
dependency of eigenvalues on thermal coupling using our lumped 
model. A scaling analysis reveals that two of the eigenvalues are not 
involved in flow maldistribution. Therefore, the occurrence of flow 
maldistribution is defined solely by the third eigenvalue. The third 
eigenvalue is a nonlinear function of the thermal coupling and fluid 
properties. Scaling analysis shows that in the limit of very high thermal 
coupling, this eigenvalue is solely dependent on the thermodynamic 
properties of the fluid. Therefore, the third eigenvalue changes non￾linearly for low thermal coupling, but converges to a single stability 
threshold in the limit of high coupling, providing the reasoning for the 
asymptotic shape of the stability boundary. 
Transient solutions of the lumped models are performed to illustrate 
the flow and wall temperature dynamics for stable and unstable cases. In 
the unstable region, the maldistribution between the microchannels is 
extreme; as a result, the flow-starved microchannel has a higher wall 
temperature. Although the linear stability confirms that very high lateral 
coupling cannot entirely avoid maldistribution, the dynamic solutions 
reveal that there is nevertheless a lesser difference between the wall 
temperatures of each microchannels in the presence of maldistribution, 
thereby reducing the consequences of maldistribution. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Md Emadur Rahman: Writing – original draft, Methodology, 
Investigation, Conceptualization. Justin A. Weibel: Writing – review & 
editing, Supervision, Project administration, Conceptualization. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
References 
[1] S. Kakac, B. Bon, A Review of two-phase flow dynamic instabilities in tube boiling 
systems, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 51 (2008) 399–433, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2007.09.026. 
[2] L.E. O’Neill, I. Mudawar, Review of two-phase flow instabilities in macro- and 
micro-channel systems, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 157 (2020) 119738, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.119738. 
[3] S. Paul, S. Paul, M. Fernandino, C.A. Dorao, The overlooked role of pressure 
oscillations on heat transfer deterioration during self-sustained flow oscillations, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 117 (2020) 253701, https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0020361. 
[4] M.E. Rahman, J.A. Weibel, Mapping the amplitude and frequency of pressure drop 
oscillations via a transient numerical model to assess their severity during 
microchannel flow boiling, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 194 (2022) 123065, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2022.123065. 
[5] M.D. Clark, M.E. Rahman, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, Effect of thermal 
capacitance on microchannel heat sink response to pressure drop oscillations, Int. 
J. Heat Mass Transf. 214 (2023) 124369, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2023.124369. 
[6] M.E. Rahman, A. Kumar, S. Singh, On the nonlinear characteristics of two-phase 
flow system as modified Fitzhugh-Nagumo model, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 207 
(2023) 123963, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2023.123963. 
[7] M.E. Rahman, S. Singh, Pressure drop oscillations with symmetry breakdown in 
two-phase flow parallel channels, J. Heat Transf. 143 (2021), https://doi.org/ 
10.1115/1.4049032. 
[8] M.E. Rahman, S. Singh, Flow excursions and pressure drop oscillations in boiling 
two-phase channel, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 138 (2019) 647–658, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.04.025. 
[9] A. Miglani, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, An experimental investigation of the effect 
of thermal coupling between parallel microchannels undergoing boiling on the 
Ledinegg instability-induced flow maldistribution, Int. J. Multiph. Flow. 139 
(2021) 103536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2020.103536. 
[10] M. Ledinegg, Instability of flow during natural and forced circulation, Die Warme 
61 (1938) 891–898. 
[11] A. Miglani, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, Measurement of flow maldistribution 
induced by the Ledinegg instability during boiling in thermally isolated parallel 
microchannels, Int. J. Multiph. Flow. 139 (2021) 103644, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2021.103644. 
[12] D. Bogojevic, K. Sefiane, A.J. Walton, H. Lin, G. Cummins, Two-phase flow 
instabilities in a silicon microchannels heat sink, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow. 30 (2009) 
854–867, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2009.03.013. 
[13] S. Szczukiewicz, N. Borhani, J.R. Thome, Two-phase flow operational maps for 
multi-microchannel evaporators, Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow. 42 (2013) 176–189, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJHEATFLUIDFLOW.2013.03.006. 
[14] S.H. Yoon, N. Saneie, Y.J. Kim, Two-phase flow maldistribution in minichannel 
heat-sinks under non-uniform heating, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 78 (2014) 
527–537, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2014.07.013. 
[15] S.N. Ritchey, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, Local measurement of flow boiling heat 
transfer in an array of non-uniformly heated microchannels, Int. J. Heat Mass 
Transf. 71 (2014) 206–216, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2013.12.012. 
[16] S.V Garimella, T. Harirchian, Encyclopedia of Thermal Packaging: Volume 1: 
Microchannel Heat Sinks for Electronics Cooling, World Scientific Publishing 
Company, 2013, https://doi.org/10.1142/7819-vol1. 
[17] Y.K. Prajapati, P. Bhandari, Flow boiling instabilities in microchannels and their 
promising solutions - a review, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 88 (2017) 576–593, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2017.07.014. 
[18] A.E. Bergles, S.G. Kandlikar, On the nature of critical heat flux in microchannels, 
J. Heat Transf. 127 (2005) 101–107, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1839587. 
[19] S.G. Kandlikar, W.K. Kuan, D.A. Willistein, J. Borrelli, Stabilization of flow boiling 
in microchannels using pressure drop elements and fabricated nucleation sites, 
J. Heat Transf. 128 (2006) 389–396, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2165208. 
[20] V.Y.S. Lee, T.G. Karayiannis, Influence of system pressure on flow boiling in 
microchannels, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 215 (2023) 124470, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2023.124470. 
[21] T. Zhang, J.T. Wen, A. Julius, Y. Peles, M.K. Jensen, Stability analysis and 
maldistribution control of two-phase flow in parallel evaporating channels, Int. J. 
Heat Mass Transf. 54 (2011) 5298–5305, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2011.08.013. 
[22] B.A. Odom, M.J. Miner, C.A. Ortiz, J.A. Sherbeck, R.S. Prasher, P.E. Phelan, 
Microchannel two-phase flow oscillation control with an adjustable inlet orifice, 
J. Heat Transf. 134 (2012), https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4007202. 
[23] K. Akagawa, M. Kono, T. Sakaguchi, M. Nishimura, Study on distribution of flow 
rates and flow stabilities in parallel long evaporators, Bull. JSME 14 (1971) 
837–848, https://doi.org/10.1299/jsme1958.14.837. 
[24] M.D. Clark, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, Impact of pressure drop oscillations and 
parallel channel instabilities on microchannel flow boiling and critical heat flux, 
Int. J. Multiph. Flow. 161 (2023) 104380, https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
IJMULTIPHASEFLOW.2023.104380. 
[25] U. Minzer, D. Barnea, Y. Taitel, Flow rate distribution in evaporating parallel pipes￾modeling and experimental, Chem. Eng. Sci. 61 (2006) 7249–7259, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ces.2006.08.026. 
[26] M. Baikin, Y. Taitel, D. Barnea, Flow rate distribution in parallel heated pipes, Int. 
J. Heat Mass Transf. 54 (2011) 4448–4457, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2011.04.034. 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 

International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 228 (2024) 125671
11
[27] T. Van Oevelen, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, Predicting two-phase flow distribution 
and stability in systems with many parallel heated channels, Int. J. Heat Mass 
Transf. 107 (2017) 557–571, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2016.11.050. 
[28] R.D. Flynn, D.W. Fogg, J.-M. Koo, C.-H. Cheng, K.E. Goodson, Boiling flow 
interaction between two parallel microchannels, in: Proc. ASME Int. Mech. Eng. 
Congr. Expo. Heat Transf, Chicago 2, ASMEDC, 2006, pp. 317–322, https://doi. 
org/10.1115/IMECE2006-14696. 
[29] R. Flynn, C.-H. Cheng, K. Goodson, Decoupled thermal and fluidic effects on 
hotspot cooling in a boiling flow microchannel heat sink, in: Proc. ASME 
InterPACK Conf. Collocated with ASME/JSME Therm. Eng. Heat Transf. Summer 
Conf., ASMEDC, Vancouver, 2007, pp. 179–184, https://doi.org/10.1115/ 
IPACK2007-33484. 
[30] T. Van Oevelen, J.A. Weibel, S.V. Garimella, The effect of lateral thermal coupling 
between parallel microchannels on two-phase flow distribution, Int. J. Heat Mass 
Transf. 124 (2018) 769–781, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijheatmasstransfer.2018.03.073. 
[31] M.E. Rahman, J.A. Weibel, Influence of convective heat transfer and wall thermal 
capacity on dynamic interactions between wall temperature and pressure drop 
oscillations during microchannel flow boiling, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 221 (2024) 
125111, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2023.125111. 
[32] S.S. Bertsch, E.A. Groll, S.V. Garimella, A composite heat transfer correlation for 
saturated flow boiling in small channels, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 52 (2009) 
2110–2118, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2008.10.022. 
[33] The MathWorks Inc, MATLAB version: 9.10 (R2021a), The MathWorks Inc, Natick, 
Massachusetts, United States, 2021 [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks. 
com. 
M.E. Rahman and J.A. Weibel 